CONTRADICTION INSIGHTS SPARK THE EMOTIONAL REACTION “No way!” We give this almost involuntary expression of disbelief when we en- counter ideas that just don’t make sense. Think of this reaction as akin to a “Tilt!” message when an old-time pinball machine got jostled too aggressively. These mental Tilt! reflexes are the opposite of connections and coincidences. Instead of reacting to the way ideas fit together, we react to inconsistencies. 
Contradiction insights send us on the road to a better story. They signal that there’s something seriously wrong with the story we’re currently telling our- selves. The example of the young cop who spotted a driver ashing his car goes from zero to sixty, from the Tilt! reflex to the new story, in seconds. The Harry Markopolos example took much longer to arrive at the new story that Madoff was running a Ponzi scheme. 
Contradictions are different from curiosity insights. Curiosities make us wonder what’s going on, whereas contradictions make us doubt—“That can’t be right.” Only one of the nine curiosity insights also coded for contradictions. 
The contradiction form of insight surprised me. I resisted it for a long time. Whereas I knew that many insights spring from connections between ideas, and I also found a bunch of cases that began with a person noticing a coincidence or a curiosity, I wasn’t expecting insights to emerge from contradictions. Yet contradictions turned up in more than a third of my sample, 45 out of 120 cases. Even when they overlapped with some of the other themes, such as the connec- tions and the coincidences, they usually were a dominant part of the process. The Tilt! reflex is a powerful trigger. 
61 
62 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

BANKING ON CONTRADICTIONS 
Insights resulting from contradictions paid off for those investment man- agers whose Tilt! detectors went off from 2003 to 2007 as the bubble in the housing market expanded. While the rest of the financial world merrily went along expanding its investments in subprime mortgages and in the burgeoning housing market, a few investors responded with “I don’t be- lieve it!” They couldn’t imagine how housing prices could continue to rise at such dramatic rates. They concluded that the United States was gripped by a housing bubble about to burst. 
Investment managers weren’t the only ones who identified the growing housing bubble. For example, Sheila Bair warned about subprime mort- gages soon after she became head of the Federal Deposit Insurance Cor- poration (FDIC) in 2006. Joshua Rosner, an analyst with a small financial research group, had predicted a vicious cycle of lower home prices and increased foreclosures in a paper he published back in July 2001. Dean Baker, the codirector of a research center in Washington, described the disastrous effects of the eventual collapse of the housing bubble in an ar- ticle he published in 2002. 
I selected the following five cases to illustrate different cues that set off the Tilt! reflex as the bubble was expanding. Each route started when a person spotted a contradiction. 
Steve Eisman was an insider. After getting a law degree and discov- ering that he hated being a lawyer, he went to work for Oppenheimer Se- curities, a small Wall Street firm. In 1991, he was appointed the lead analyst at Oppenheimer for the first subprime mortgage lender to go pub- lic. Eisman had been specializing in subprime mortgage companies for more than a decade by the time of the 2007–2008 crash. He was well- known for being arrogant and opinionated—and often right. Even his wife, who is devoted to him, admits that he is beyond outspoken—not tactically rude in order to gain an effect but genuinely rude. 
Eisman at first was an advocate for the subprime mortgage market, but he changed his mind when he saw the shoddy loan practices in the late 1990s. He didn’t make any friends when he called attention to these 
CONTRADICTIONS 63 

practices, but he was vindicated when the subprime mortgage market ex- perienced an earlier collapse in the late 1990s. 
That collapse sent a number of subprime lenders into bankruptcy. Eis- man expected that they had learned their lesson and would become more careful in the future about giving mortgages to people with marginal ability to keep up their payments, but that isn’t what happened. By 2005, the sub- prime mortgage industry returned bigger than ever. Eisman again watched delinquency rates go up and the quality of the loans go down. Financial institutions were again lending money to homeowners who were less able to demonstrate their capacity to repay even though the previous delinquen- cies should have made the lenders tighten their standards. In 2005, Eisman saw the subprime growth rates continue to rise even as the interest rates were rising, a fact that should have cooled off the demand. 
When Eisman investigated, he found that the lenders had learned a lesson from the 1998 subprime crash. It was just a different lesson than he expected. When the subprime bubble burst in the late 1990s, the lenders went bankrupt because they had made bad loans to unworthy applicants and kept too much of those loans on their books. Instead of learning not to make bad loans, the industry had learned not to keep the risky loans on their books. They sold the loans to Wall Street banks that repackaged them as bonds, found ways to mask the riskiness, and sold them to unwary investors. That’s when Eisman’s Tilt! reflex went into overdrive. It reached even higher levels when he investigated the ratings agencies. In a con- versation with a representative of Standard and Poor (S&P), Eisman asked what a drop in real estate prices would do to default rates. The S&P rep- resentative had no answer because the model the agency used for the housing market didn’t have any way to accept a negative number. Analysts just assumed housing prices would always increase. 
By this time, Eisman had started his own hedge fund. He was certain that the subprime market would blow up again, and he was determined to find a way to short the market and profit from Wall Street’s blind greed. 
John Paulson, owner of a struggling hedge fund, bet against the sub- prime market and collected more than $15 billion, the world’s biggest payday. Unlike Eisman, Paulson and his partner, Paolo Pellegrini, were 
64 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

outsiders to the housing and subprime markets. Their Tilt! detectors went off as they watched the trends in those markets. When the price of a com- modity increases beyond its worth, smart investors sell their holdings to lock in their profits. But when the prices increase for no apparent reason, and the rate of increase itself increases, there might just be a contradiction of supply and demand. There might be a bubble because the demand itself creates more demand as investors expect the upward trend to continue. In 2005, when Paulson and Pellegrini ran the numbers about the growth rate in the subprime market, they concluded that the increases in real estate prices weren’t sustainable. Yet the whole enterprise depended on continued price increases. The prices didn’t have to fall. The bubble would quickly collapse even if the prices leveled off. For Paulson and Pellegrini, the contradiction was between the marketplace belief that real estate prices would continue their dramatic rise and the economic forces that prevent housing prices from rising forever. It was a question of when the bubble would burst, not whether it would burst. 
Michael Burry was also an outsider, a defiant outsider who was skep- tical about the major investment firms. Burry spotted the bubble earlier than most, perhaps because of his nature as a contrarian. He was socially isolated as a boy, eventually diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome. Instead of socializing, he spent his time studying, and upon graduation he was admitted to medical school. In 1997 when he got his medical degree, he’d accumulated a tuition debt of $150,000. 
While doing a residency at Stanford, he put a personal ad on an online dating service: “I’m single and have one eye and a lot of debt.” (His left eye had been removed after he was diagnosed with retinoblastoma—a rare form of cancer—when he was one year old.) This bizarre come-on attracted a young corporate finance specialist who appreciated Burry’s honesty, and they were married three weeks later. 
Burry had solved one of his problems, a longing for social connection. Another major problem was his medical school debt. A third problem was that he didn’t enjoy medicine very much. Multiple problems can sometimes combine into a solution, and that’s how it turned out for Burry. For many years he’d pursued a hobby of following the stock market, and 
CONTRADICTIONS 65 

when he was twenty-nine, he decided that he was more interested in fi- nancial investment than in medicine. If nothing else, it would let him pay off those loans. Burry’s family provided him with some capital to get started. One account has Burry’s wife raiding her retirement account to provide him with capital. Presto, Burry had his own hedge fund. 
Burry’s website on financial trends had attracted a small following, and some of his fans were happy to buy shares in his new company. Be- cause of his analytical skills, by 2003 Burry’s hedge fund was managing $250 million and he was making $5 million a year. And that’s when he got interested in subprime mortgages. 
His suspicions were aroused in 2003 as the subprime market started its rise. When he dove into the data in 2004, he found that lending stan- dards had been declining. But why should standards have to decline if people really believed the housing market would always keep growing? One top-rated analyst intoned, “Home prices have never gone negative.” Another proclaimed, “Home prices won’t even go flat.” 
If they believed their hype, they’d be tightening their standards, not loosening them. That inconsistency bothered Burry. If housing prices could be counted on to always go up, why did the lending institutions have to go after less qualified applicants? Why did these institutions have to rely so heavily on variable-interest-rate loans that lured homeowners with low initial rates that were not fixed and were bound to increase? Burry sensed a contradiction between the public display of optimism and the private practice of reducing standards. He predicted that the real estate market would soon decline because many of the people taking out the subprime mortgages wouldn’t be able to keep up with the payments. Burry estimated that the housing market had a two-year horizon. All the risky loans made at teaser rates in 2005 would become much riskier once the two-year window closed in 2007 and those low, teaser interest rates in- creased to 11 percent. Burry anticipated that starting in 2007 the default rates would sharply increase, and the bubble would burst. Who were the homeowners taking out these loans and accepting a risky option to pay nothing down? People who didn’t have much savings. Not the kind of people who were well suited to handle interest rates of 11 percent. 
66 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Greg Lippmann was an insider. He bought and sold subprime mortgage bonds at Deutsche Bank and stumbled upon the financial bubble in 2005 when his bosses directed him to bet against the housing market. Lippmann didn’t like the idea—why fight a market that was always going to rise? He dutifully studied the housing situation, and what he uncovered horrified him. Even though housing prices were still rising, the mortgage default rates had increased from 1 percent to almost 4 percent. He calculated that if the default rates rose to just 7 percent, the lowest-rated mortgage bonds would become worthless. If the default rates reached 8 percent, the next level of bonds would become worthless, and so forth. Tilt! The increased default rates were bound to increase supply and reduce demand. They were bound to cool off the housing market. These implications frightened Lippmann. If housing prices just leveled off (let alone declined), it would devastate financial markets that depended on a continual increase. 
Gene Park was another insider. He worked for the insurance company AIG (American International Group). In 2005, he read a Wall Street Jour- nal article on New Century, a mortgage lender with a high dividend, and wondered if he should invest some of his own money in New Century. He found, though, that the company’s success in the mortgage business stemmed from subprime loans that seemed frighteningly poor to him. Park also saw an increase in risky investments involving insurance on bundles of mortgages. The insurance was designed to reduce risk by spreading over lots of mortgages but didn’t give much weight to the risk that the entire U.S. housing market might fall. Then Park got a call from a penniless and jobless friend who mentioned that he was getting offers from banks, each wanting him to buy a house he couldn’t afford. That’s when Park’s Tilt! detector went off. He realized that there was an un- sustainable investment bubble around subprime mortgages. And his com- pany, AIG, was on the wrong side of the bubble. 
Unlike the other investors, Park didn’t have any way to turn his Tilt! response into a windfall. He couldn’t even convince his bosses that AIG was in big trouble. The other four reaped enormous profits for themselves and for their companies. For example, Burry made $750 million in 2007 for the investors in his hedge fund. Paulson did even better. Their gains 
CONTRADICTIONS 67 

depended on additional insights about how to use special investment tools to buy insurance on companies they expected to fail. 
For the purposes of this chapter, however, I am just interested in the way they arrived at the conclusion that Wall Street, the financial engine of the United States, was headed for a dramatic and imminent breakdown. Most financial experts seemed oblivious to this breakdown. It also took business and government leaders by surprise. We seem to be better pre- pared to spot asteroids that threaten to collide with our planet than to foresee this type of financial devastation. Asteroids are a known threat that is amenable to scientific tracking. Disasters like the 2007–2008 fi- nancial breakdown are less visible because they are conceptual rather than physical, and because they violate so many strongly held beliefs. To quote Mark Twain, “You can’t depend on your eyes when your imag- ination is out of focus.” 
Five different investors, some insiders, others outsiders, drew on dif- ferent perspectives. They used different data to pick up the contradiction between the euphoric expansion of the subprime mortgage market and their own realization that this market was about to collapse. 
All five were skeptics. We are told that to make discoveries, we have to keep an open mind. However, a suspicious mind can also pay off. These five investors, and Markopolos, the Bernie Madoff sleuth, tended to be suspicious, if not cynical. Their skeptical mind-sets helped them in- vestigate pathways that others missed. 
Their skepticism spurred me to become curious about a skeptical mind- set as opposed to an open-minded one. I went back and recoded the data, looking at the 45 cases of contradiction insights in my sample. In two- thirds of the contradiction instances, the person gaining the insight had a suspicious mind-set rather than an open mind. He or she resisted the pop- ular enthusiasms. 
Meredith Whitney illustrated this skeptical stance in the way she tracked down the problems facing the Wall Street firm Bear Stearns. Whitney was a managing director at Oppenheimer until she left in February 2009 to start her own advisory firm. She’d been trained at Oppenheimer by Steve Eisman in the mid-1990s. 
68 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Whitney had flagged the growing subprime mortgage problem. Her research report in 2005 warned about scandalously reduced credit stan- dards; subprime lenders were facing huge losses that threatened a round of corporate insolvencies. Unfortunately, few people paid attention to Whitney’s warning. 
The financial community did listen to Whitney on October 31, 2007. That’s when she made her reputation. She publicly predicted that Citigroup was facing a financial crisis and would have to cut its dividend or face bankruptcy. At the time, Citigroup seemed to be in good shape. Once Whitney exposed its weakness, Citigroup shares dropped 8 percent by the end of that afternoon. Its CEO resigned four days later. And it cut its dividend two weeks after that. 
In early 2008, Whitney decided to take a closer look at Bear Stearns. Two Bear Stearns hedge funds had abruptly closed down in mid-June 2007, but the company seemed to weather these losses and listed a strong asset sheet. The failed hedge funds had invested heavily in the subprime mortgage market; most analysts assumed that Bear Stearns had the re- sources to ride this crisis out. 
On March 8, 2008, after Whitney heard rumors about the solvency of Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers, she learned that the Federal Reserve was going to make it easier for investment banks to borrow money. “My first reaction was, ‘Oh, this is going to be completely fine.’” 
But then she heard that the investment banks that needed these funds would not have access to the loans for several weeks. She called back the traders who had previously complained about Bear Stearns, but now they clammed up and acted as though there were no problem at all. They in- sisted that they were still trading Bear Stearns stock. 
Whitney immediately felt they were lying to her. “When people that you deal with all the time outright lie to you, then you know there’s serious panic there.” She contacted another of her sources, asking directly about Bear Stearns’s solvency, and she was told it was possible Bear Stearns might go under. Unfathomable, but possible. 
Whitney has a reputation as one of Wall Street’s most skeptical re- 
CONTRADICTIONS 69 

search analysts, and she began to look through that lens at what was hap- pening to Bear Stearns. She deliberately adopted a suspicious mind-set and tried to interpret every data point as evidence that Bear Stearns was finished. In short order, she convinced herself. She knew that many of Bear Stearns’s businesses were contracting. The other investment banks were taking market share from Bear Stearns’s prime brokerage business as hedge funds withdrew their cash. She knew that Bear Stearns was highly leveraged, at least 30 to 1, sometimes 50 to 1. She thought, “This is it—Bear’s out. . . . If people start pulling assets, they [Bear Stearns] can’t cover their debt service. . . . And then it’s over. . . . By Thursday I knew it clear as day. . . . This has happened to me several times . . . where I know things in my gut [e.g., the risks created by the erosion of subprime lending standards, the impending fall of Citigroup]. But I can’t believe I’m the only person who is putting it together.” 
I like the notion that Whitney was deliberately using a skeptical lens. This lens gave Whitney a different perspective than if she had tried to keep an open mind. Her suspicious lens enabled her to gain the insight that Bear Stearns was going to collapse. 
Whitney acted as a detective, going against popular beliefs to gain in- sights that eluded her more open-minded colleagues. The same was true of the five contrarian financial investors who saw the end of the subprime bubble. An open mind has its virtues, but a suspicious mind provides its own unique benefits. It produces a different view and exposes alternative facts and trends. 
A skeptical stance helped John Snow in this next incident. Once he lost his faith in miasma theory, he knew where to look to find the contrary evidence and to lend support to his theory that cholera was being spread by contaminated water. 
THE BROAD STREET PUMP 
The Tilt! reflex led to John Snow’s discovery about cholera in the mid- 1800s. Cholera strikes in epidemics as the infection spreads from one 
70 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

victim to another. The cholera microbes cause diarrhea and vomiting that rapidly dehydrate their victims, quickly killing them. People can die less than a day after showing the first symptoms. Cholera made its first ap- pearance in Britain in 1831. By 1833, when the epidemic ended, more than 20,000 people had perished in England and Wales. The next epidemic of 1848–1849 killed another 50,000. 
At the time of Snow’s discovery most people believed in miasma theory, that diseases such as cholera and yellow fever were spread by bad air and disgusting smells created by unsanitary conditions. Those were the days before anyone had a germ theory of disease. There were no in- struments for detecting microbes. Diseases such as cholera spread terror because they were so lethal and so mysterious. People didn’t know how to protect themselves. 
John Snow was born in 1813 in York, England, to a working-class family. He became a surgeon’s apprentice and then moved to London, where he eventually received a degree as a medical doctor. He published articles on a range of medical and public health topics. 
Snow became prominent in London for his mastery of anesthesia. Medical and dental procedures had been brutal affairs. A good surgeon needed a sharp saw and muscular assistants to hold the patient down. Then in October 1846 a Boston dentist reported that he used a gas— ether—to reduce pain by making the person unconscious during the procedure. A London dentist adopted ether as a remedy for pain shortly thereafter, and Snow observed a demonstration at the end of December. 
One problem with anesthesia is getting the dosage right. Too much and the life of the patient is endangered. Too little and the patient might wake up in the middle of the procedure. 
Snow set out to understand how to safely regulate the dosage. Dentists had administered ether by soaking rags in it and then clamping the rags over the patient’s nose and mouth. Snow designed an inhaler that con- trolled the amount delivered more precisely than the rag method. Using studies with small animals, and then with his own patients, he determined how the amount of ether affected the length of time the patient remained 
CONTRADICTIONS 71 

unconscious. He even used himself as a subject. He’d write down the time, give himself a dose of anesthetic, pass out, wake up a few minutes later, note the time he regained consciousness, and calculate the effect of the dosage. When chloroform replaced ether as an anesthetic, Snow shifted his research and made himself an authority on chloroform as well. 
His research and his monographs helped pioneer the use of anesthesia to reduce pain in medical procedures. He was brought in to administer chloroform to Queen Victoria to help her with the birth of her last two children. She reported that she was gratified by the effect of the anesthetic. 
So when Snow gained his insight into how cholera was spread, he wasn’t someone who could be treated as a crank, the way the SEC re- garded Harry Markopolos or the Australian medical community treated Barry Marshall. Snow was an eminent physician. Yet his reputation didn’t spare him from widespread criticism. When people contradict the pre- vailing wisdom, even professional prominence won’t protect them. 
Snow became interested in cholera after reading about a contradiction. A sailor died of cholera in a lodging house. A few days later another per- son checked in to the same room and contracted cholera. That sequence didn’t fit with miasma theory. If inhaling noxious air caused cholera, why didn’t other people in the lodging house or the neighborhood get sick? Noxious vapors should spread in currents, afflicting everyone in their path, but cholera didn’t follow such paths. The sailor story activated Snow’s Tilt! reflex. 
Now he wondered about other pieces of the puzzle: people who were in the same room with victims sometimes came down with the disease even if they didn’t touch the victim, and others who touched the victim sometimes didn’t get it. That pattern of observations also seemed to con- tradict miasma theory. 
Another contradiction struck Snow. As a physician, he expected cholera victims would show lung damage if cholera were transmitted by bad air. Yet the victims’ lungs seemed normal. The damage was in their digestive systems, a coincidence that implied a connection—that they caught the disease from something they ate or drank. 
72 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

That was Snow’s insight. Cholera was caused by something the vic- tims ingested, not by what they breathed. But what had they ingested? He gathered more data and began to suspect that cholera was spread through ingesting the waste matter of other victims, typically by drinking contaminated water. 
Cholera seemed to parallel water systems. Snow found one outbreak in 1849 in which twelve people died; they all lived in one slum, all in one row of connected cottages, and they all drank from the same well. Plus there was evidence that sewage water could get into that well. Another set of nearby similar flats used a different well, but only one person died of cholera in the same epidemic. Surely they breathed the same air. The evidence pointed to the water system. 
Snow also found a natural experiment: a community that got water from two different companies, an upriver company and a downriver one. The upriver company drew its water from the Thames north of London and, more importantly, upriver from a sewage drainage point. The cus- tomers who used this company didn’t get cholera. The downriver company drew its water below the point where raw sewage entered into the Thames. Those who used this water company showed high rates of cholera. All the citizens of the community breathed the same air. So there was a nice coincidence. Snow relied on contradictions and coincidences as he built his case that cholera was caused by contaminated water. 
In 1854 the United Kingdom was hit with another big cholera outbreak. John Snow and an allied investigator, the Reverend Henry Whitehead, showed that cholera cases clustered around one specific water pump, the Broad Street pump, in Whitehead’s district. The following figure shows how the cases clustered around the pump, which is marked by an X. Snow speculated that the water source for this pump had become contaminated. 
Snow noted other anomalies during this outbreak: none of the workers at a local brewery came down with cholera, yet they breathed the same air as everyone else. But unlike everyone else, the brewery workers slaked their thirst with beer, not water. 
Snow tracked down an important piece of data: a woman who had moved away from the area of the Broad Street pump still got cholera. Her 
CONTRADICTIONS 73 case should have disproven Snow’s ideas, except that shortly before her death her son had filled up a jug from the Broad Street pump and brought it to her because she liked the taste of that water so much. Instead of chal- lenging Snow’s idea, this piece of evidence supported it. 
Later investigation revealed that the Broad Street pump had gotten contaminated through the dirty diapers of an infant. The infant’s mother cleaned the diapers in a bucket and tossed the fouled water into a cesspool that ran into some cracks in the pipes of the Broad Street pump. The local council decided to seal up the Broad Street pump by removing its handle. People from the neighborhood, who didn’t believe Snow’s dirty water theory, were angry because the water from this well tasted so good, and then the cholera epidemic ended. The epidemic was already waning, so removing the pump handle didn’t make much difference. Nevertheless, the public seized on the coincidence. The popular story is that removing 
74 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

the pump handle ended the epidemic. Good stories are hard to resist, even when they’re wrong. 
Snow’s lofty reputation hadn’t protected him from ridicule by the medical community, particularly the proponents of miasma theory who retained their conviction that cholera spread by foul air. The Lancet, a re- spected British medical journal, commented on the absurdity of Snow’s ideas. Nevertheless, after the Broad Street pump incident Snow’s theory of dirty water was quickly accepted. Within a year this success story trav- eled across the Atlantic to the United States and guided American cam- paigns to protect citizens from cholera. 
Contradictions fueled Snow’s insights about cholera, just as they contributed to the insights of Walter Reed’s team about yellow fever. Contradictions between theory and evidence, between expectations and observations, set off the Tilt! reaction in these medical detectives. 
We are built to notice associations and coincidences, and we are also built to detect anomalies, inconsistencies, irregularities. We are built to attend to cues that violate our expectancies and arouse our curiosity. We are built to be surprised. 
Are contradictions really insights, or are they what lead to an insight? They certainly lead to insights, to the better story. I believe they also count as an insight. Noticing a contradiction shifts the way we understand things. Markopolos knew something after scanning Madoff’s results that he didn’t know before, even though he hadn’t yet sorted out what Madoff was do- ing. Snow knew that miasma theory didn’t explain cholera, even before he found the real cause. 
Thomas Kuhn, a physicist who theorized about the history and phi- losophy of science, wrote The Structure of Scientific Revolutions to de- scribe how anomalies lead to breakthroughs. Kuhn wanted to explain the origins of breakthroughs such as Copernicus discovering that the sun, not Earth, is the center of our solar system. Or Roentgen discovering X- rays, a phenomenon others had observed but dismissed because the notion of X-rays was too inconsistent with their beliefs. Kuhn argued that most research is “normal science”―studies that add more detail to existing 
CONTRADICTIONS 75 

knowledge and theories. Normal science, however, usually suppresses the contradictions, the observations that don’t fit the frameworks that the scientific community shares. Over time these discrepancies grow into crises until someone comes along to propose a paradigm shift, a new way to understand natural forces, a new set of questions, a new way to search and research. Kuhn described these paradigm shifts as scientific revolu- tions. They require paradigm destruction—the shedding of the previous paradigm. The new paradigm changes how scientists understand phe- nomena. It changes what scientists see and how they act in designing ex- periments. Paradigm shifts count as insights because the result is a shift from a mediocre frame to one that provides a better understanding of the same phenomenon. 
Kuhn seems to me to overemphasize revolutionary paradigm shifts. He is too enthusiastic about paradigm destruction, the discarding of the previous paradigm. Connections, coincidences, and curiosities also can lead to important and revolutionary scientific insights without paradigm destruction. Nevertheless, Kuhn and other philosophers and historians of science have helped us appreciate how new ideas often emerge from a breakdown of previous beliefs. New paradigms emerge from the recog- nition of anomalies and contradictions. 
SEEING THE LIGHT 
Albert Einstein’s theory of special relativity seems to fit this pattern of contradictions that lead to insights. Kuhn cited Einstein’s theory as one of his examples of a paradigm shift. 
At the age of sixteen, Einstein began to conduct thought experiments about beams of light. These thought experiments were mental exercises that helped Einstein appreciate properties of light and also helped him notice anomalies and inconsistencies. Einstein imagined different condi- tions and possibilities, pursuing these speculations for ten years. His thought experiments resulted in his theory of special relativity in 1905 when he was twenty-six. 
76 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

In one of his thought experiments, Einstein wondered what would happen if he traveled at the speed of light alongside a light beam. What would he see? Logically, the light beam should appear frozen, traveling at the same speed as he, like two automobiles in neighboring lanes driving at the speed limit. But not long before, in 1899, James Clerk Maxwell had published a set of equations to model electric and magnetic fields. These equations predicted that electromagnetic waves would propagate through a vacuum at the speed of light. Therefore, if Einstein rode a beam of light, then a second light beam traveling alongside him would still travel away from him at the speed of light. If he turned on a flashlight, the light would travel away from him at the speed of light. So there was a paradox, a contradiction, because nothing can go faster than light. 
Eventually, Einstein resolved the paradox by changing the constant. Previously space and time were thought to be constant. This was the New- tonian view. A second on Earth is the same duration as a second anywhere else in the universe. According to Newtonian physics, we could synchro- nize our watches anywhere in the universe because time beats uniformly. Likewise, a foot on Earth is the same as a foot in every other location. Space and time should look the same to all observers, regardless of their relative velocities. 
Einstein’s thought experiments started him thinking that the speed of light should be the constant. In exploring the implications of this new be- lief, Einstein speculated that space-time was variable. Using mental images of clocks and trains, light beams and speeding bicycles, Einstein showed that for the speed of light to be constant, time must appear to pass more slowly the faster you move. Lengths must contract and masses must appear to increase as you approach the speed of light. If you’re in a car, moving at 90 percent light speed, everything looks normal. Time seems to be passing normally; everything in the car seems to be the usual size. It’s only to others watching from outside the car that time in the car seems to be moving too slowly and lengths appear too long. 
Light isn’t like a traveler on a moving sidewalk in an airport. If the sidewalk is moving at 2 miles per hour (mph) and you are rushing to catch 
CONTRADICTIONS 77 

your plane at 4 mph, you’ll be crossing through the terminal at 6 mph. But light doesn’t have that property. It always appears to travel at the same speed whether or not it originates from a moving source. 
Instead of explaining away the inconvenient contradiction, that even if he were moving at the speed of light, a light beam would travel away from him at the speed of light, Einstein took the contradiction seriously and discovered a way to fit everything else around it. 
Einstein, like John Snow, like Harry Markopolos, and like the con- trarian financiers, used a contradiction to make a discovery. This strategy of using contradictions seems very different from the strategies of noticing coincidences and curiosities and making connections. 
As I waded through the examples and through the data, I enjoyed my investigation because each example of insight was so inspiring, but I grew less confident that I’d be able to formulate an answer to the mystery of what gives rise to the flash of illumination. I had too many answers, and they didn’t seem to relate to each other. And there was one more strategy to think about, the strategy most commonly invoked by the sci- entific community. 
