MY ATTEMPT TO PENETRATE THE MYSTERY of how insights originate had turned up five candidates: connection, coincidence, curiosity, contradictions, and creative desperation. Each candidate had some appeal. The connection theme was the most common, but the creative desper- ation theme matched the way scientific researchers thought about insight. To sort things out, I tried several different types of investigation. I studied the coding results for the data I had collected. I reviewed the scientific literature on insight. And I dived into the stories themselves. 
LOOKING AT THE DATA 
The first approach was to review all the data Andrea Jarosz and I had coded. The five candidate explanations of insights described in the previous chapters all came through. I found connection insights in 82 percent of the cases. Con- tradictions showed up in 38 percent of the cases. Coincidences played a role in 10 percent of the cases. Curiosities contributed to 71⁄2 percent. Impasses and creative desperation were found in 25 percent of the cases. As you can see, the total for all five adds up to more than 100 percent because some of the cases coded for more than one of the themes. They weren’t mutually exclusive. 
91 
92 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Unfortunately, the data did a better job of demolishing ideas than of building them. For example, insights are supposed to depend on having an open mind, but two-thirds of the contradiction insights stemmed from a suspicious mind-set, not an open one. 
Graham Wallas’s advice to engage in specific preparation didn’t hold up very well either. While most of the insights in the sample were delib- erate, 98 out of the 120 cases, 18 percent were accidental, such as Jocelyn Bell Burnell discovering pulsars when she was looking for quasars, or Martin Chalfie hearing about the green fluorescent protein. These acci- dental insights couldn’t rely on a preparation stage because the person wasn’t wrestling with a problem. 
Wallas’s second stage, incubation, ran into even more serious trouble. Only 5 of the 120 cases in my sample clearly involved incubation. In 39 percent, incubation was impossible. For instance, Wagner Dodge running for his life from a raging wildfire didn’t have a chance to engage in incu- bation. For the remaining cases, more than half, the incident accounts weren’t sufficiently detailed to determine what was happening. Regardless of how we count these, incubation doesn’t seem to be necessary for insights. 
Insights are supposed to pop into our heads without any warning, flashes of illumination that send us running into the streets shouting, “Eu- reka!” One instant we are baffled, and the next instant we understand everything. Darwin had an “aha” experience after reading Malthus. Chalfie certainly had it when he listened to the lunchtime lecture about jellyfish that glowed. 
Most of the cases I collected, 56 percent, were sudden, “aha” types of insights, but the other 44 percent were gradual. The notion of gradual insights seems bizarre to many insight researchers. To them, the sudden “aha” experience is what sets insight apart. It is a defining feature. These scientists object to the very idea of gradual insights. 
I suspect that some insight researchers have gotten sidetracked by the “aha” experience and have lost sight of the phenomenon they set out to study. As I argued earlier, I don’t believe insights are the same as “aha,” any more than conception is the same as orgasm. Research is easier to do 
DIFFERENT WAYS TO LOOK AT INSIGHT 93 

on the visible phenomenon, the “aha,” but my quest was to understand insight, not facilitate experiments. 
How can insights be gradual? One way is through coincidences. When Michael Gottlieb and his colleagues encountered their first AIDS patient, they were puzzled. By the fifth patient, they were ready to write up their findings on a new, mysterious, and terrifying disease. Someplace among these five patients, they spotted a repetition of symptoms that formed the kernel of their finding. 
Coincidences mounted as a gradual swelling of suspicion for yellow fever, cholera, ulcers, and AIDS. There was no single event that made the Denver coaches realize they had to stop LeRoy Butler, the linebacker for the Green Bay Packers. That insight came only after seeing him disrupt play after play. Jocelyn Bell Burnell didn’t suddenly glom on to pulsars. “By about the fourth or fifth time I came across this signal, my brain said, ‘You’ve seen something like this before.’” 
A second route to gradual insights is an incremental process, one small breakthrough after another. Revolutionary technologies such as Johannes Gutenberg’s development of the printing press or Ford Motor’s develop- ment of mass production depended on solving several problems, making steady progress rather than having a single instant of inspiration. Steven Johnson writes about slow hunches in innovation, in contrast to the flash of illumination. My data on gradual insights certainly fit the notion of slow hunches. Even when it happens, the “aha” experience, everything finally snapping into place, marks the culmination of the insight process. It isn’t the insight itself. 
Gradual insights also emerge from deliberate searches such as the one Meredith Whitney conducted to see if Bear Stearns was in financial trou- ble. As she uncovered more and more evidence, she came to realize that the firm was unlikely to recover. This is a third route. 
Here is an example of a deliberate insight process that I went through to understand the surprising end to a 2007 boxing match. I had to replay the sequence many times, adding a bit more understanding each time, be- fore I came to see how Floyd Mayweather knocked out his opponent. 
94 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

THE LUCKY PUNCH 
In December 2007, I watched a televised broadcast of a boxing match between Ricky Hatton and Floyd Mayweather Jr. for the welterweight boxing championship. Both fighters were undefeated. Hatton, the junior welterweight champion, was an aggressive fighter, continually swarming and pressuring his opponents. His record going into the fight was 43–0, with 31 knockouts. Mayweather, the welterweight champion, had a record of 38–0, with 24 knockouts. He was known for his defensive skills and pinpoint punching accuracy rather than for his power. At the time of the bout, ring experts considered him pound-for-pound the best fighter in the world—more dominant over the contenders in his weight class than any champion in any other division. 
In the tenth round of a twelve-round bout, Mayweather caught Hatton with a lucky punch, a left hook, and knocked him down. Hatton managed to get up but was so woozy the referee stopped the fight, which had been close up to that point. 
I wondered about that lucky punch and decided to study it more care- fully. I obtained a video of the fight and replayed the knockdown. 
What I saw surprised me. Hatton didn’t simply walk into a punch. Watching it in slow motion, I saw that Hatton was throwing his own left hook and Mayweather just beat him to the punch. 
I played the sequence again. Hatton moves in. Mayweather is trapped in his own corner of the ring. Hatton throws his left hook. Mayweather is just standing there. But as Hatton throws his punch, he drops his right hand, giving Mayweather the opening he needs. 
I rewind and play it again. I watch Hatton throw his left hook, and I see that he is about halfway into the punch before Mayweather even moves. Mayweather finally puts his right glove up to block Hatton’s punch and brings his own left hand back to get leverage for his punch. He starts bringing his left fist back even as Hatton is halfway into his punch. Then Mayweather unleashes his left hook. 
So I was wrong about the lucky punch. Mayweather deliberately waited for Hatton and then started his punch when he saw what Hatton 
DIFFERENT WAYS TO LOOK AT INSIGHT 95 

was doing. Hatton was throwing a big, slow, sweeping left hook, and Mayweather clipped him with a “cut” left hook, a shorter punch with a small windup and a shorter, faster arc. He used Hatton’s momentum to magnify the force of the punch. 
Where did that come from? Mayweather and his trainer must have studied tapes of Hatton to see his tendencies, such as his habit of drop- ping his right hand when throwing a left hook, but Mayweather would have needed to get the feel of those tendencies in the ring. Back to the rewind button. 
Hatton doesn’t throw his big left hook at all in the first round. It makes its first appearance in the second round, four times, each the same. The fighters are separated; Hatton bounces forward, telegraphing that he is going to throw a punch with his left hand. Hatton’s right hand isn’t a threat; it isn’t even a shield because Hatton drops the right glove as he puts force into his left. Each time Hatton throws his left hook, his power punch, Mayweather just ducks or blocks the punch, taking its measure. At other times Hatton fakes the left hook and instead throws a straight left jab. Mayweather is going to have to wait a fraction of a second to see if Hatton intends to jab or hook. 
In round three, Hatton throws his big left hook only once. Mayweather has started to time it, throwing his cut left hook for the first time to beat Hatton to the punch but not doing much damage. They are in May- weather’s corner. Throughout the fight Hatton throws that left hook eigh- teen times (that I could count); ten of them are in Mayweather’s corner of the ring, the corner where Hatton eventually gets flattened. The only times Mayweather responds with his cut left hook are in that same corner. It is the place where Hatton prefers to launch his left hook attack. Perhaps Mayweather retreats there because he feels safe, choosing it for his am- bush. It is the kill zone. 
During the eighth round, in a premonition of the end, Hatton traps Mayweather in Mayweather’s own corner, throws the left hook, and gets nailed with Mayweather’s cut left hook. Hatton is stunned but recovers. If I didn’t know better, I would assume I was seeing the knockout punch two rounds later. 
96 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

After getting tagged in the eighth, Hatton doesn’t use his left hook in the ninth round, but the fight is slipping away from him. By the tenth round perhaps Hatton is getting tired or desperate. He starts winding up with his left hook, four times in short succession at five seconds, seventeen seconds, and twenty-four seconds into the round. The fourth time, sixty- one seconds into round ten, is the final installment. Hatton gets clobbered, and so does my conviction about the lucky punch. 
The fight illustrates to me how Mayweather learned Hatton’s tenden- cies and tip-offs, how he learned to time Hatton’s left hook. Many years ago when he was the heavyweight champion of the world, Floyd Patterson commented that boxing was like chess but with bodies instead of pieces. After reviewing the Mayweather-Hatton fight, I had a better idea of what Patterson meant. My insights about Mayweather’s strategy came about gradually. There was no “aha” instant when it all clicked into place. 
My review of the coded data raised doubts about several popularly held beliefs about insights but didn’t provide any answers. I still didn’t understand the link among the five categories of connections, coinci- dences, curiosities, contradictions, and creative desperation. To sort that out, and hoping to acquire additional ideas about insights, I switched to a second type of investigation. 
LOOKING AT THE SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
When I began this project, I carefully collected more than eighty recently published scientific research papers on insight, plus about fifteen books. Then I wondered if I should read them. My training is to start any research study by reviewing the scientific literature, but I wanted to have fresh eyes in gathering and examining all the cases of insight I had collected. If I reviewed the scientific literature, I would be seeing all these cases through the same lenses as other investigators. I would interfere with my own process of discovery. 
Therefore, I put them all aside and didn’t read any. It was a risky de- cision. I might have missed some important issues, gone down blind al- 
DIFFERENT WAYS TO LOOK AT INSIGHT 97 

leys, or wasted my time reinventing what other researchers already knew. I accepted these risks because I wanted to gain my own impressions and build my own mental model of insight. I did not want to have a prepared mind that might get in the way of finding something new. 
Nevertheless, really good researchers and theoreticians have pondered questions about insight in the past; I had a professional responsibility to study their ideas. Also, I was curious about what they had found and about their perspectives. After I had collected and categorized most of the cases, I judged that I was far enough along to check out other views. I retrieved those articles and books and worked my way through them. One of my fa- vorites was The Nature of Insight, a 1995 collection of chapters from lead- ing insight researchers. I found a lot of useful ideas in that book and the other sources, but also a lot of confusion and disjointedness that mirrored my own impressions. The different researchers argued with each other about all kinds of fundamental issues. Some claimed that the “aha” expe- rience was an essential part of insight and that cognitive restructuring wasn’t necessary. Others argued just the reverse. Some of the researchers suggested that people don’t even rely on insight processes to solve insight problems and that the concept of insight is useless. After sifting through the scientific papers, I was glad that I had not gotten drawn into these debates. 
My literature review included some of the research on decision biases to see how they lined up with insights. Decision biases are systematic de- viations from rational standards of good judgment. For example, we might judge that Americans are more likely to die in a car crash than from stroke, probably because TV and newspapers often report car crashes. We look at the dramatic photographs of twisted metal and think that there’s no way we could have survived. There are fewer photographs and stories about stroke victims even though stroke causes four times as many deaths as traffic accidents. Therefore, our estimate is biased by what we see in the media. I speculated that in some ways, insights are a counterpoint to decision biases. 
In the early 1970s, the field of psychology produced a new discipline devoted to studying decision biases. Two Israeli researchers, Danny 
98 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Kahneman and Amos Tversky, founded the heuristics-and-biases move- ment, which catalogs and explains the different kinds of biases afflicting us. Kahneman won a Nobel Prize for this research (Tversky had died be- fore he could share in this honor). The heuristics-and-biases movement has given rise to the discipline of behavioral economics, uniting econo- mists and psychologists in a quest for ways to exploit decision biases for socially valuable purposes. 
In his recent bestseller Thinking, Fast and Slow, Kahneman distin- guishes between fast and intuitive System 1 thinking and System 2 think- ing, which is slower, more critical, analytical, and deliberate. The heuristics-and-biases movement has shown that decision biases largely stem from System 1, the cognitive impulses we have. System 2 thinking refers to our mental strategies for monitoring these impulses to inhibit and correct them when necessary. The heuristics-and-biases community advocates methods for strengthening System 2 so that it can do a better job of controlling System 1. 
These ideas line up nicely with the two arrows in the performance di- agram I presented in Chapter One. System 2 is all about the downward arrow. It is all about reducing errors. The weight of the heuristics-and- biases studies, reporting bias after bias, can unsettle us, making us doubt our own judgments, our capacity for clear thinking. Frequently, the mes- sage of the heuristics-and-biases research is that we are likely to draw mistaken conclusions unless we engage in rigorous critical thinking. The message is that we have to strengthen the down arrow. 
I believe it is important to counterbalance this negative impression of System 1 with a sense of awe and appreciation about the insights we create and the discoveries we make. We need both arrows, just as we need both System 1 thinking and System 2 thinking. The process of gaining insights, the upward arrow, balances the worries about decision biases, the down- ward arrow. This perspective on the heuristics-and-biases research strengthened my interest in understanding the up arrow. 
I had tried looking at the data and then at the literature. It was time for the third approach. 
DIFFERENT WAYS TO LOOK AT INSIGHT 99 

LOOKING AT THE STORIES 
I had faced a similar confusion some thirty years ago. I had been evalu- ating different models of decision making, but none fit the data I’d col- lected. I had interviewed twenty-six experienced firefighters and recorded thirty-two stories of tough decisions they had made under time pressure and uncertainty. And I had gotten stuck. The stories didn’t support my own expectations or the standard accounts of how people compare options to make decisions. 
In desperation (I am tempted to call it creative desperation), I ditched all these hypotheses and patiently read through these stories to see what they were telling me. I put my trust in the stories, not in the theories. The result was a discovery of a different model of decision making, a recog- nitional model, that dispensed with the notion that people have to compare options. That definition of decision making—a comparison of options— had been trapping me, and I could only abandon it after I immersed myself in the stories. 
In the years since, I have relied on methods for collecting critical incidents—stories—to understand the way people think. I have had some satisfying successes, along with some failures. Perhaps the most gratifying success is that these methods for collecting and analyzing stories have given rise to a community of naturalistic decision researchers. 
Naturalistic methods can be a bit nerve-wracking because you never know what you are looking for. You sift through the stories, on the lookout for patterns that might be meaningful. When you do laboratory studies in psychology, you define in advance what data you’re going to collect, what hypotheses you’re going to test, what statistics you’re going to use. But the story-based strategy leaves all of that open. You can’t define in advance how you are going to analyze your data because you don’t know what patterns might emerge. Reviewing the stories is scary and exciting. 
The incident-based method is well suited for the early stages of science in which investigators try to explore some phenomenon. I hoped to find some answers in the 120 stories of insights. 
100 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

The data coding seemed to cluster the cases into five insight themes, and that turned out to be a useful finding in itself. Connections, coinci- dences, curiosities, contradictions, and creative desperation. Which of these was the answer? Or did I have to blend them, and if so, what would that blend look like? 
There were some glimmers, hints of a way forward. I was taken by the contradiction form of insight, particularly the insights of each of the financial experts who foresaw the 2007–2008 crash. I was inspired by John Snow’s discovery of how cholera is transmitted. I kept returning to my admittedly feeble understanding of the Einstein example, the way he developed his theory of special relativity. The Chalfie case with the green fluorescent protein seemed significant. 
I wondered if I could build on my definition of insight as an unex- pected shift to a better frame—a better story—for understanding how things work. Was there any daylight there? The notion of a frame includes slots for fitting data into the frame. In each of my cases a few of the slots usually stood out. They were more important for anchoring the story than the other slots were. Would that idea give me any leverage, or was it just a set of mixed metaphors, anchors, slots, and leverage? 
It was all very vague. These glimmers were just fragments of ideas. I hoped these fragments might be useful, but I didn’t anticipate how they would lead to a new model of insight, an explanation of how we make discoveries. 
