MARTIN CHALFIE IS A PERFECT EXAMPLE of the experience most people have of “connecting the dots” and solving a problem by being ex- posed to more ideas. Like Chalfie, we get a new piece of informa- tion that combines with other information we already have, and, presto, we make a discovery. Let’s see how it happens by looking at the routes taken by the admirals who noticed that Pearl Harbor was vulnerable to attack, a prominent child psychologist who made important discoveries about the empathy of babies, and Charles Darwin, who formulated a theory of evolution. 
THE BATTLE OF TARANTO 
Few people have heard about the Battle of Taranto, which took place November 11–12, 1940, even though it forever changed the way military leaders think about combat at sea. The battle showed that battleships were vulnerable to air- planes launched from carriers. 
The battle took place at the beginning of World War II before the United States entered the conflict. France had surrendered on June 25, 1940, leaving the British Empire alone to combat Germany, Italy, and Japan. In the Mediter- ranean Sea, the Italian fleet restricted British efforts to resupply British forces in Egypt. The British devised Operation Judgement to attack the First Squadron of the Italian Navy, which was comfortably sheltered in the Bay of Taranto on the inside of the heel in the southeast of Italy. To maintain secrecy, no written 
33 
34 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

records were made of the planning that went into this mission, which ex- plains why it has received so little attention. 
The British used a single, brand-new aircraft carrier, the HMS Illus- trious, to mount the first all-carrier air attack in history. The first airplanes took off at 9:00 in the evening on November 11 and reached their target at 10:58. In less than an hour the British airplanes launched their torpedoes and put half the Italian fleet out of commission for six months. 
The British carried out the attack with vintage biplanes, twenty-four British Swordfish bombers. Up to that time, experts believed that torpedo attacks could be made only when the water depth was at least 30 meters (98 feet), the depth heavy torpedoes sank after being dropped from an airplane. And Taranto Bay was only 40 feet deep. The Italians believed their fleet was safe from airborne torpedoes. 
The British, however, had devised a way to use a wire to pull up the nose of the torpedo so that it did a belly flop rather than a nosedive. They also added wooden fins to the torpedoes so that they wouldn’t dive so deeply. 
When news of the British success at Taranto got out, the Japanese Ad- miral Isoroku Yamamoto saw the attack’s implications. He had the insight that the American naval fleet “safely” anchored at Pearl Harbor might also be a sitting duck, vulnerable to an unexpected air attack. Yamamoto first wrote down his ideas in January 1941 and continued refining them until they became the blueprint for the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941. 
Somewhat ironically, Yamamoto did not approve of Japan’s decision to go to war with the United States because he was pretty sure Japan would lose such a war. In a letter whose contents were leaked, he wrote, “Should hostilities once break out between Japan and the United States, it would not be enough that we take Guam and the Philippines, nor even Hawaii and San Francisco. To make victory certain, we would have to march into Washington and dictate the terms of peace in the White House. I wonder if our politicians (who speak so lightly of a Japanese-American war) have confidence as to the final outcome and are prepared to make the necessary sacrifices.” 
CONNECTIONS 35 

Yamamoto had studied at Harvard University for a few years and was fluent in English. He opposed the Japanese invasion of Manchuria, its in- vasion of China, and its pact with Nazi Germany, as well as its preparation for war with the United States. His opposition to these military activities made him a target for assassination by Japanese militarists. To protect Yamamoto’s life, the naval minister appointed him the commander in chief of the combined forces and sent him off to sea, where he’d be safe. 
In contrast to Yamamoto, the Japanese army leaders were confident that Japan would prevail and were eager to brush the United States aside to pursue their plans to dominate Southeast Asia. These leaders had too much political power to be stopped. Yamamoto knew that with war in- evitable, Japan couldn’t outlast the United States, but perhaps starting the war with a knockout blow that devastated American naval power would be a way for Japan to triumph. 
Yamamoto delivered that blow at Pearl Harbor with his surprise attack, using 353 airplanes from six aircraft carriers. The Japanese forces hit all eight battleships at Pearl Harbor, sinking four of them and badly damaging the others. The Japanese also sank or damaged many other ships, including three cruisers and three destroyers; wrecked 188 U.S. airplanes; and killed 2,402 Americans. 
Admiral Harold Stark, the chief of naval operations (CNO) for the United States, saw the implications of Taranto even more quickly than Yamamoto. Less than two weeks after the Battle of Taranto, Stark signed a memo, dated November 22, 1940, stating, “By far the most profitable object of a sudden attack in Hawaiian waters would be the Fleet units based in that area.” The memo observed that it might be desirable “to place torpedo nets within the harbor itself.” Later, on January 24, 1941, Stark sent a letter to his boss, Frank Knox, the secretary of the navy, stat- ing, “If war eventuates with Japan, it is believed easily possible that hos- tilities would be initiated by a surprise attack upon the Fleet or the Naval Base at Pearl Harbor.” 
Two admirals in two opposing navies quickly grasped the significance of the British attack. They both had the same insight. The Japanese turned 
36 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

that insight into a battle plan for a surprise attack. The Americans lost track of the warning issued by Admiral Stark, the head of the entire U.S. Navy. Why didn’t Stark follow up on the threat against the American fleet? He tried to. He issued the warning. He suggested the torpedo nets. But it is hard to maintain vigilance for a long period of time. Daily emergencies create constant distractions. Plus, the energy put into self-defense gets in the way of training. Besides, torpedo nets interfere with ships moving in and out of the harbor. And how plausible was this threat that Stark warned about? Pearl Harbor was so shallow that the admiral in charge of its defense didn’t believe the Japanese could attack the American ships with torpedoes dropped from airplanes. The torpedoes would get stuck in the mud. Apparently, the navy officials who knew that the Japanese had developed shallow-water torpedoes never bothered to pass this in- formation on to the Pearl Harbor commanders. Therefore, no torpedo nets 
were put into place. Insights don’t count for much if we can’t translate them into action, 
and despite Stark’s position as CNO, his subordinates deflected and ig- nored his insight. President Franklin D. Roosevelt removed Stark as CNO in March 1942 and reassigned him to London, an unofficial way of blam- ing him for the disaster. 
Consider the insight Yamamoto and Stark shared. They both antici- pated the coming war between their countries. They both knew that the U.S. Navy had superior forces. And then this news about Taranto. Map- ping the Battle of Taranto onto the Pacific, Yamamoto and Stark recog- nized that it was an analogue for what the Japanese might be able to do to the U.S. fleet in Pearl Harbor. Yamamoto and Stark both made the same connection. 
This connection process seems like the same one Martin Chalfie fol- lowed in grasping the significance of the genes that glowed with green light. All three men, Yamamoto, Stark, and Chalfie, received new and unexpected information and grasped its implications. They quickly con- nected the new data to their situation to discover insights about actions they could take. 
CONNECTIONS 37 

BROCCOLI AND GOLDFISH 
Alison Gopnik formed a connection insight from a remark made by her two-year-old son. Gopnik is a highly respected developmental psychol- ogist at the University of California at Berkeley. She comes from an ac- complished family: one younger brother is Blake Gopnik, the Newsweek art critic, and another is Adam Gopnik, staff writer for the New Yorker magazine. One of her specialties, besides inspiring younger brothers, is understanding how babies think. 
Gopnik believed that babies are smarter than people realize. She sus- pected that in some ways babies could take the perspectives of other people. In psychology-speak, this skill is described as theory of mind—an appre- ciation that other people have their own minds and preferences. She believed that children make sense of the world in the same way scientists do, forming stories/theories about how causes work. Gopnik dislikes the notion that ba- bies are just defective, unformed grownups. She sees babies as different and, in some ways, more alert to their surroundings than grownups and more active learners than scientists. They are designed to learn about the world around them, not just their own specialty field. Grownups often narrow our attention to what matters most to us. Babies aren’t as good at attending to just one thing but seem to be more alert to anything unexpected. Gopnik’s 2009 book, The Philosophical Baby, describes the wonderful capabilities she has been able to demonstrate, such as the capacity for empathy. 
Developmental psychologists had believed that children didn’t develop the ability to take another perspective until they were about seven years old. Gopnik thought decentering—taking another person’s perspective— happened much earlier. But she didn’t know how to demonstrate that ba- bies have this skill. 
Then came a fateful day when Gopnik made a fancy dessert, pineapple in kirsch, for a dinner party she was hosting. Her two-year-old son had a taste of it and made a terrible face. “Then for weeks afterward, completely out of the blue, he would turn to me and say, ‘Mommy, pineapple is yummy for you, but it’s yucky for me.’” 
38 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Gopnik turned her son’s comment into an experiment, the broccoli and goldfish paradigm. She gave fourteen- and eighteen-month-old babies bowls of raw broccoli and Pepperidge Farm Goldfish Crackers and had them try some of each. They all liked the crackers more than the broccoli. Then Gopnik’s co-researcher, Betty Repacholi, took a bit of food from each bowl and made either a disgusted face or a happy face. Half the time Repacholi made a disgusted face with the goldfish and a happy face with the broccoli, and the other half of the time it was reversed. 
Repacholi would then put her hand out to the baby and ask for some food. The eighteen-month-old babies would offer the type of food that Repacholi liked, even if it was the broccoli, not the goldfish that the baby liked. And in case you suspect the babies were hoarding their goldfish, if Repacholi expressed a liking for goldfish, that’s what the babies gen- erously offered. The fourteen-month-old babies, however, just got con- fused when Repacholi went into raptures over the broccoli, and then they offered her the goldfish. 
Using the broccoli and goldfish task, Repacholi and Gopnik demon- strated that eighteen-month-old babies were capable of empathy, but not fourteen-month-olds. The eighteen-month-olds didn’t respond egocen- trically, giving Repacholi the food (goldfish) that they liked, nor did they respond selfishly, hoarding the goldfish. Instead they offered Repacholi the food she seemed to like the most. Experiments like this opened the way for psychologists to make discoveries about the way babies think. 
Gopnik’s insight follows the same trajectory we’ve seen before. She encountered a new and unexpected idea and quickly saw how it linked to the work she was doing. Like Yamamoto, she arrived at a new under- standing that expanded the actions she could potentially take. Insights like these show us more effective ways to get things done and even expand our goals. For Yamamoto, the insight gave him an idea for how to cripple the American fleet. Stark discovered he needed to take additional measures to protect that fleet, but he tragically failed to get his subordinates to heed his warning. Gopnik designed a new method for testing infants. 
CONNECTIONS 39 

THE MOTHER OF ALL SCIENTIFIC INSIGHTS 
Charles Darwin followed the connection path in formulating his theory of evolution driven by natural selection. Darwin was only twenty-two years old when he set out on the voyage of HMS Beagle on its mission to chart the South American coast. A recent graduate of Cambridge, Dar- win expected to become an Anglican parson. He wasn’t following any family tradition. His father and grandfather were freethinkers, and as a child he attended a Unitarian chapel with his mother. Perhaps he was in- fluenced by the Anglican boarding school he was sent to following his mother’s death when Darwin was nine years old. 
Darwin was indifferent to his classes when he attended the University of Edinburgh Medical School, so his father switched him over to Cam- bridge. The one topic that did capture his interest was natural history. He made some findings about beetles and became a follower of John Henslow, a leading botany professor. 
Before settling down to a parson’s life, Darwin decided to take a few years to pursue his long-standing interest in natural history. Henslow nominated Darwin for an unpaid position as a naturalist aboard the HMS Beagle. The captain of the Beagle was happy to have Darwin as a com- panion for the voyage, and Darwin was grateful for the opportunity. 
The expedition lasted for five years, from 1831 to 1836. Darwin spent his time making observations about geography and about different animal species. It was a time of wonders for him as he encountered all manner of odd phenomena. At the ship’s first stop in the Atlantic in Cape Verde, Dar- win found seashells high up on a cliff. In Patagonia he discovered fossil bones belonging to huge mammals that were extinct. In the Galapagos Is- lands Darwin found mockingbirds that differed from one island to the next. 
Upon his return to England, Darwin wondered what drove the varia- tions in species he had seen on his voyage. He knew that farmers and pi- geon breeders could deliberately cultivate favorable variations. Why would that occur in nature? 
40 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Then in September 1838, Darwin read An Essay on the Principle of Population by the Reverend Thomas Robert Malthus on population growth and the competition for resources. Malthus’s essay, written forty years earlier, claimed that populations grow until they exceed the food supply and then the members of the population compete with each other. Darwin immediately saw how this could explain the variations in species he had observed. In the competition for resources, any random variation that created an advantage would be selected and others would lose out. The species members with the competitive advantage would be more likely to survive and breed and transfer their traits to offspring. Unfavor- able variations would be lost. Darwin saw that nature was doing auto- matically what farmers had been doing deliberately—selecting the best traits and favoring their continuation. 
The result was Darwin’s theory of natural selection relying on blind variation and selective retention. Blind variation refers to the natural vari- ability of physical features such as size and coloration in individual mem- bers of a species. Selective retention means that if a variation increases survival value, then the individual possessing that variation would be more likely to survive and pass the trait on to its descendants. (In 1871 Darwin added sexual competition and selection to the mix.) Reading Malthus gave Darwin the missing piece that fit all his observations together. 
At roughly the same time, Alfred Russel Wallace, also a British nat- uralist, was doing fieldwork in the Malay Archipelago and came up with the same theory of evolution. Wallace had been galvanized by his own reading of Malthus. 
Independently, Darwin and Wallace were wondering how species change. They were primed to connect their ideas to Malthus’s notions of competition for resources. They both connected a set of ideas in ways that others did not. And they both had firsthand experience as naturalists. They had seen variations between species but also individual differences within a species. They both could appreciate how individual differences provided a platform for blind variation and selective retention to work. Lots of people read Malthus’s book; Darwin read the sixth edition. But only Darwin and Wallace saw how to apply Malthus’s ideas to the evolution of species. 
CONNECTIONS 41 

All these cases (Yamamoto, Stark, Chalfie, Gopnik, Darwin, and Wal- lace) follow a connection strategy for making insights. The person making the discovery gets some new piece of information and sees how it com- bines with other information to form a new idea. Sometimes the person sees a new way to combine different kinds of information even if none of them are new. 
THE LEADING CANDIDATE 
The connection strategy seemed like the answer to the mystery I was pur- suing. It accounted for 82 percent of the cases in my sample, 98 out of the 120 cases. It fit nicely with Graham Wallas’s idea of an unconscious stream of associations that eventually burst into awareness. The strategy offers a clear image of insights as connecting the dots. And it suggests that we can increase insights by exposing ourselves to lots of different ideas that might help us form new connections. So I now had a coherent answer to give people who wanted to know more about the up arrow in the equation I showed them and wanted to know what they could do to have more insights. 
Still, I wasn’t ready to conclude that the connection strategy explained the flash of illumination. In fact, I had some reservations about this con- nection strategy. It suggests that insights are just a matter of connecting the dots, and I dislike the “connecting the dots” metaphor. The Yamamoto, Stark, Chalfie, Gopnik, and Darwin examples come across as connecting the dots because I haven’t told you about all the non-dots. The non-dots would have slowed the stories down, but they are an important part of each insight—determining which dots to connect. Anyone can connect the dots if we remove the non-dots and clarify the ambiguous dots and group the dots that look different but are really the same. If all that is left is a set of unique and valid dots, then the job of connecting the dots be- comes much easier. If we leave in all the ambiguities, then the connection gets trickier. “Connecting the dots” trivializes the business of making sense of events and arriving at insights. 
42 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Look at some of the non-dots in connecting the Battle of Taranto to Pearl Harbor. There must have been many non-dots—irrelevant messages— so let’s just examine the ones that are “anti-dots”—data about the differ- ences between Taranto and Pearl Harbor that could have disconnected the two harbors and blocked the insight gained by Yamamoto and Stark. 
Start with the problem of getting to the target. For Taranto, the British warships were already in the Mediterranean. To attack Pearl Harbor, the Japanese would need a large convoy, at least six aircraft carriers instead of one. This convoy would have to travel for 4,000 miles without being detected. To travel that far, the aircraft carriers and the other ships in the convoy (whose size reached thirty ships in the actual Pearl Harbor assault) would need to be refueled. The British didn’t have to worry about refu- eling in the Battle of Taranto, but at that time the Japanese didn’t have the refueling capability they would need for the 4,000-mile journey to Pearl Harbor. 
Next we add the problem of bad weather. The British didn’t worry about weather at Taranto—the Swordfish torpedo bombers only had to fly for two hours to reach the Italian fleet. In contrast, the Japanese fleet would have to sail for a week and a half before reaching Pearl Harbor. What if the fleet arrived in the middle of a Pacific storm and couldn’t launch a single airplane? Even today’s meteorologists don’t have that kind of long-range forecasting accuracy. 
Once the Japanese fleet reached Pearl Harbor, it would have to contend with tougher defenses than the British faced at Taranto. The United States had its own aircraft carriers, which posed a severe threat in case they de- tected the Japanese approach. The British attacked the Italian fleet at night, but the Japanese lacked precision instruments and would have to mount a daytime attack. After Taranto, surely the United States would be flying reconnaissance missions around Pearl Harbor. (Actually, the United States ceased its aerial reconnaissance because those missions interfered with training.) And after Taranto, the U.S. Navy was likely to be using torpedo nets, blunting the primary Japanese weapon. (The U.S. commanders, as noted earlier, chose not to deploy torpedo nets, believing that their force was protected by the shallowness of the water at Pearl Harbor.) 
CONNECTIONS 43 

That’s a final anti-dot. At the time of Taranto, the Japanese couldn’t successfully launch airborne torpedoes in such shallow waters. The Jap- anese had to work hard to get their torpedoes to work at Pearl Harbor. 
The connection between Taranto and Pearl Harbor isn’t so obvious when we toss in non-dots and anti-dots. We no longer look at Taranto and conclude how easy it would be for the Japanese to do the same thing at Pearl Harbor. By exploring the anti-dots, we see why Yamamoto and Stark deserve so much credit for not getting distracted by irrelevant details. They recognized the fundamental lessons of Taranto: that naval fleets were now vulnerable to air attacks and that concentrating battleships and cruisers in one place, such as Taranto and Pearl Harbor, makes them an inviting target. They become the anvil, not the hammer. 
Many of Admiral Stark’s subordinates were so fixated on the idea that the navy battleships were protecting Pearl Harbor that they had trouble seeing the ships themselves as a Japanese target. The connection strategy is more than just connecting the dots. It involves changing the way we think. We’ll see how some of the other insight strategies—contradictions and creative desperation—shake up our thinking as much as or even more than the connection strategy. 
That statistic I tossed out earlier—that connections were involved in 98 out of the 120 cases—is misleading. The other insight strategies also turned up a lot when I coded the data. I coded each incident for all five in- sight strategies: connections, coincidences, curiosities, contradictions, and creative desperation. Most of the insights were a blend. They depended on more than one of the strategies. Thus, of the 98 cases in which I found the connection strategy, only 45 used the connection strategy alone. The other 53 depended on making a connection, plus one or more of the other strategies. That’s why we shouldn’t be too quick to conclude that insights are simply about making connections. In a mystery story, you don’t stop your investigation with the first likely suspect you encounter. 
