WHEN I STARTED INVESTIGATING why people fail to have insights, I remembered an evening in late September 2003 when I was in- volved in the heat of a fantasy baseball pennant race. If you are not involved in one of these leagues, fantasy baseball may seem trivial or non- serious. However, those who do play appreciate the passion that drives us to beat the other teams and the mental energy and time we put into making our decisions. Competitors act as managers of teams whose performance depends on the accomplishments of actual baseball players. Each “manager” assembles a team made up of active baseball players and racks up points depending on how well those players perform in real games. 
As a manager, I might have ten pitchers on my team. If they win a lot of games and strike out a lot of batters, my scores go up. If my pitchers get clob- bered, then my scores go down. The season lasts as long as the regular baseball season, from early April to the end of September. The fantasy managers jockey all season long to come out on top at the end. The managers are scored using categories such as how many games the team’s pitchers won and how many overall strikeouts they had. 
My daughter Devorah joined the league in 2003, playing remotely via com- puter. It was her rookie season, and she was hoping not to disgrace herself. She was aware of all the trash talk and the public humiliation of people who make stupid trades. She didn’t do badly—she was in seventh place out of ten teams with a chance to move into fifth at the end of the season. The outcome depended on Devorah’s pitchers and whether they would win enough games and strike 
111 
112 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

out enough opposing players. You might think that the difference between fifth and seventh place isn’t a big deal, but once the competitive fever takes hold, fantasy baseball players start obsessing about every edge they can get. 
Devorah lives in the Boston area, but on Saturday evening, September 27, 2003, she was visiting me at my home in Yellow Springs, Ohio, so I got to watch her in action. She was worried about her pitchers. Our league had set a maximum of 1,250 innings a team’s pitching staff could compile over the entire season. After a team went over this maximum, none of the statistics for any of its pitchers would count. 
Devorah was very close to this maximum. In fact, Devorah’s team had compiled 1,249 innings over the season and had only one inning left going into Sunday, the last day of the season. (A baseball game lasts for nine innings unless the score is tied, and then the game continues for extra innings until there is a winner.) Devorah had one pitcher scheduled to start on Sunday. She needed every win and every strikeout he could get. She asked me if her team would get credit only for any of her pitcher’s strikeouts during the first inning, or would the team get credit for all the strikeouts he recorded that game? And would she get credit for a win if her statistics shut down after the first inning? 
I commiserated with her—it must be frustrating not to know how the computer program calculated these things. Devorah suggested that we look up the rules. Even though I had been playing fantasy baseball for many years, I wasn’t familiar with the new computer-based version we were now using. I didn’t know I could look up the rules or even where to find the rules. 
Devorah located the rules button on the home page, clicked on it, and found out that all pitchers’ statistics counted on the day that the team ex- ceeded its maximum innings. After that day, no pitcher’s statistics would be counted. So we had the answer: Devorah’s team would get credit for all of her pitcher’s strikeouts on Sunday, not just the strikeouts he scored in the first inning. And if he won the game, she would get credit for that as well. 
STUPIDITY 113 

“Okay,” I said, “you don’t have to worry about tomorrow.” I was sat- isfied that we had resolved the question. But I noticed that Devorah wasn’t really listening to me. She was thinking about something else. 
“You know, it’s too bad I only have one pitcher in action tomorrow because all my pitcher innings will count, and tomorrow is the last day of the season. But there’s nothing preventing me from picking up pitchers who are scheduled for tomorrow. I have no time to lose.” 
Devorah’s insight had two parts, understanding and action. First, she didn’t have to worry that her pitching staff would have too many innings. That was her new understanding. Her original question was about her one pitcher who was scheduled to appear, but she saw that her entire pitching staff was free from the 1,250 innings limit. Second, her understanding translated into action. She could replace pitchers on her team to get as many as possible who were slated to play on Sunday. She could drop from her team all the inactive pitchers (starting pitchers play only every fourth or fifth day) and replace them with free agents―pitchers who hadn’t been claimed by any teams in our fantasy league and were sched- uled to play on Sunday. All their statistics would count even though De- vorah’s team would go way over the 1,250-inning maximum. It was like being at an all-you-can-eat buffet. 
I hadn’t noticed that loophole. No one in our league history had ever done such a thing. It was 11:00 P.M. The deadline for picking up unclaimed players was 12:00 midnight. 
Devorah rapidly dropped all the pitchers who weren’t starting and re- placed them with ones who were scheduled to pitch on Sunday. “I’m dropping Roger Clemens [a pitching superstar] for Matt Clement [a jour- neyman],” she exclaimed disbelievingly. 
On Sunday, Devorah picked up the points she needed because her new set of pitchers scored several wins and collectively racked up lots of strikeouts, enabling her to slip into fifth place. 
Devorah’s actions were within our ground rules; only later did we find that her tactic was well-known in other leagues. But Devorah inde- pendently invented it. I was there. I watched her read the rule, see that it 
114 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

answered her question, and then make an unexpected discovery about how she could reshape her entire pitching staff. 
You may look at what Devorah did and conclude that this is nothing special—this sort of insight happens all the time. Exactly. We all contin- ually have insights, mostly small and not terribly significant. 
This incident isn’t just about Devorah’s insight. It’s also about the fact that I was so clueless. I was sitting right next to her. I had the same information. Yet I was a chucklehead and missed the insight. 
What happens to us to make us so stupid? What blinds us to the in- sights that dangle right in front of our faces? Even as I was resolving the first mystery—the paths we take to gain illumination—I became gripped by this second mystery, What prevents us from having insights? 
STUPIDITY IN ACTION 
Many years ago, I took a vacation with my two young daughters, Devorah and Rebecca. We flew from Dayton, Ohio, to New York City. At the Day- ton airport I followed my usual travel routine and put my keys in my briefcase once I parked my car. During the trip my youngest daughter, Rebecca, developed an ear infection. We went to a physician in New York, who warned against letting her fly for a few weeks. 
To return to Ohio at the end of the week, we decided to take a train. Because southwest Ohio doesn’t have any train service, we took the train from New York to Toledo, Ohio. My mother-in-law, Bessie, lived in De- troit and had already planned to drive south to our home in Yellow Springs for a family event, which was why we had to get back to Ohio. Bessie was happy to pick us up in Toledo, which was on her route south. She then drove us to the Dayton airport so that I could get my car. So far so good. My replanning was working out well. 
At the Dayton airport, as I got out of her car, I wondered, “Do I need my suitcase and briefcase?” I couldn’t see why—I was just going to drive home and would meet Bessie there. So I left them in Bessie’s car. As I approached my car, I realized my mistake. 
STUPIDITY 115 

Before that moment, I could have correctly answered each of these questions: Where are your car keys? (in my briefcase, as usual for a trip), Where is your briefcase? (in Bessie’s car), and Where is Bessie’s car? (driving out of the airport). I knew all the pieces but failed to put them together in time to notice the inconsistency. 
I had to rent a car at the airport and return it the next day. It was an extra expense and an inconvenience, but not a tragedy. 
I got off easy compared to a professional colleague who came home, got the mail, and decided to dash upstairs on a quick errand. She left the mail, including some glossy material, on the bottom stair to be retrieved and properly stored after she finished her errand. While upstairs, she de- cided to check e-mail, with one thing leading to another for the next sev- eral hours. It was now dark and time for dinner. She came downstairs but didn’t bother turning on the light—why waste energy? After all, she knew the staircase well. Except that she had forgotten the mail. She could have answered the questions “Where is your mail?” (on the bottom step), “Does your mail provide a safe amount of friction?” (no—there are glossy brochures), and “Can you see the mail?” (no—it is dark). When she got to the bottom step, she hit the glossies and went flying. The result was a compound fracture of her leg, traction, and sixteen weeks in bed. 
These are both examples of stupidity. If I had remembered that my car keys were in my briefcase, I wouldn’t claim the memory as an insight. If my colleague had remembered the glossies on the stairs, no insight. Nei- ther of us noticed the contradiction lurking within our beliefs. We both knew that our current situation differed from what we originally had in- tended, but we failed to see the implication. 
I can also think of times when I’ve failed to make obvious connections. I have been wanting to show my wife, Helen, a small locker I recently rented to store file boxes and other materials, but we’ve never had the time. Then one day Helen and I had to run an unanticipated errand that took us right past the facility. It wasn’t until we were driving back that I realized I should have grabbed my keys to the storage locker on the way out of the house. I missed the opportunity. Dumb. 
116 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

These are the kinds of connections we expect to make, the kinds of contradictions and inconsistencies we expect to catch. We shouldn’t give ourselves credit for catching them. The failure to catch them is what merits our attention. 
These cases of stupidity seem like the opposite of insight, the opposite end of the contradiction and connection insight paths we explored earlier. When we spot really subtle inconsistencies and contradictions, we de- serve credit for insight. When we fail to spot obvious connections and contradictions, we castigate ourselves. In the fantasy baseball example, Devorah and I received additional information: the rule that all of her pitchers’ innings would count. She made the connection, saw the impli- cation, and reshaped her team. I didn’t make any connection with that information. The incident in which I failed to grab the storage locker keys also shows a failure to make a connection. Here the new information was the unexpected errand. I missed the implication until we drove past the storage facility. 
In the example of my misplaced car keys, there was a glaring contra- diction between my beliefs. I knew where my keys were, I knew I would need my keys once I reached my car, but the Tilt! reaction didn’t kick in until it was too late. Ditto my friend who knew where she’d left the cir- culars and knew she was approaching the bottom step, but no Tilt! reaction until she literally tilted into the air. 
Often we blame our memory. I should have remembered that I put my car keys in my briefcase. Actually, I sort of remembered. I could have answered the question correctly if prompted. And I spontaneously re- membered as I got closer to my car and started reaching in my pocket. But the key location didn’t pop into my consciousness when I needed it. Memory isn’t just about calling up answers to information requests, such as the first time I saw Tom Cruise in a movie (answer: Risky Business). We depend on memory to spotlight information without being asked. Memory is necessary for this kind of spotlighting, but it isn’t sufficient. Some more active process must be at work here, a process of flagging the right connections and contradictions to spotlight. 
STUPIDITY 117 

Examples of stupidity put actual insights into perspective. They suggest that we often engage in the insight strategies even for everyday activities that don’t count as insights. We continually make connections, look for implications, spot inconsistencies, and challenge weak assumptions. When we’re on automatic pilot, and the connections and contradictions are ob- vious, we don’t give ourselves credit for noticing them. 
We do give ourselves discredit for missing them. When we fail to make obvious connections, when we miss obvious anomalies and incon- sistencies, when we get hung up on assumptions that are clearly wrong, we are guilty of stupidity. Perhaps each insight pathway in the Triple Path Model could be treated as a continuum from stupidity to insight, with normal alertness in between. Stupidity and insight would then be two bookends―the two poles of each continuum. 
In assembling my 120 insight cases, I encountered more than 20 cases of stupidity, which I put in a separate file. I had noticed a few and then started adding others, building a new stack. The stupidity file included “false insights”—cases in which people erroneously believed they had achieved an insight and had full confidence in their cleverness. Financial bubbles often depend on false insights. The investors bidding prices up to ridiculous levels aren’t just caught up in a frenzy of greed. They often delude themselves into thinking that a transformational change is in the works. The Japanese stock and real estate bubble of the late 1980s was thought to reflect Japan’s growing dominance of the world economy. The U.S. dot-com bubble in the late 1990s apparently heralded the emergence of information technology that was going to result in a new paradigm of cascading productivity. The U.S. housing bubble in the early twenty-first century supposedly reflected more powerful analytical tools for managing risk. The world of financial investment is not lacking in false insights. 
The topic of stupidity deserves its own treatment. However, I don’t have the ambition to be a researcher of stupidity. It is bad enough to be a practitioner. 
Besides, I didn’t want to become distracted from my effort to under- stand what interferes with our ability to gain insights. Stupidity might be 
118 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

one reason, but there are others. Upon hearing of Darwin’s theory of evo- lution, T. H. Huxley commented, “How extremely stupid not to have thought of that.” 
People like Huxley are not stupid; they just feel stupid when they miss an insight that is right in front of them. What gets in their way? 
If I had studied insight using the puzzles that are the staple of labora- tory research—the water jars, the nine dots, and the pendulum puzzle— I could have tested lots of college undergraduates on the same task and contrasted their successes and their failures. That’s one of the advantages of using standardized puzzles. They let a researcher delve into the reasons that some people solve the problems quickly and others struggle. Unfor- tunately, I couldn’t make systematic comparisons using the grab bag of examples I had collected. 
Or could I? Perhaps there was a way to do a natural experiment. 
