ALMOST A CENTURY AGO, GRAHAM WALLAS, a cofounder of the London School of Economics, published the first modern account of insight. His 1926 book, The Art of Thought, contains a model that is still the most common explanation of how insight works. If you do any exploration into the field of insight, you can’t go far without bumping into Wallas, who is the epitome of a British freethinking intellectual. 
In contrast to my struggles to make sense of the incidents in my collection, Wallas succeeded in finding clear themes in the collection of insight stories he compiled. Perhaps I could learn from his example. His insight model might even answer questions about how the up arrow works and how to boost insights. It was time for me to get a history lesson. 
Wallas was born in 1858 in Monkwearmouth, Sunderland, in the northeast corner of England. His father, a minister, gave his son a standard religious up- bringing, but Wallas abandoned his Christian faith as a student at Oxford Uni- versity from 1877 to 1881. He replaced it with a new faith, socialism. He joined the Fabian Society in 1884, shortly after it was founded by Sidney and Beatrice Webb. Fabians wanted to transform society by gradual, rather than revolution- ary, means. Members included Bertrand Russell, Leonard and Virginia Woolf, H. G. Wells, and other luminaries. The society was named after the Roman general 
17 
18 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Fabius Maximus, nicknamed The Delayer, who avoided open battle with the Carthaginian leader Hannibal, relying instead on continual pressure. The Fabian Society was an advocate for causes such as minimum wage, slum clearance, a universal health care system, and a national ed- ucation system. Several members of the Fabian Society helped form the 
British Labour Party in 1900. Wallas quickly moved into the inner circle of the Fabian Society and 
formed a close connection with the Webbs. When Sidney and Beatrice Webb established the London School of Economics in 1895, they asked Wallas to be its first director. He turned down the offer but agreed to teach at the college. In her diary, Beatrice Webb remembered Wallas as a tall but slouching man, with pleasant features, driven by moral fervor rather than ambition. Although Wallas seemed a bit preachy to Beatrice Webb, he had a genius for teaching and inspired his disciples. 
Among his various identities, Wallas was a psychologist. He believed that psychology could be used to improve society, especially to reduce some of the stresses created by the Industrial Revolution. He disagreed with the theory that people behave rationally and base their behavior on calculating the costs and benefits of each possible course of action. Wallas argued that politicians who want to get people to behave sensibly will need to study psychology. 
In The Art of Thought, Wallas tried to apply concepts of psychology to show people how to think more effectively. Some contemporaries of Wallas—William James and Henri Bergson—had also speculated about the nature of insight, but neither provided an account as comprehensive and compelling as the one Wallas produced. He drew on his forty years of experience as a teacher and administrator; accounts that poets, scientists, philosophers, and others had published on their thought processes; and examples from students and friends. 
The most lasting contribution of The Art of Thought is contained in a chapter called “Stages of Control,” in which Wallas presents a four-stage model of insight: preparation, incubation, illumination, and verification. 
THE FLASH OF ILLUMINATION 19 

During the preparation stage we investigate a problem, applying our- selves to an analysis that is hard, conscious, systematic, but fruitless. 
Then we shift to the incubation stage, in which we stop consciously thinking about the problem and let our unconscious mind take over. Wallas quoted the German physicist Hermann von Helmholtz, who in 1891 at the end of his career offered some reflections on how this incubation stage feels. After working hard on a project, Helmholtz explained that “happy ideas come unexpectedly without effort, like an inspiration. So far as I am concerned, they have never come to me when my mind was fatigued, or when I was at my working table. They came particularly readily during the slow ascent of wooded hills on a sunny day.” 
Wallas advised his readers to take this incubation stage seriously. We should seek out mental relaxation and stop thinking about the problem. We should avoid anything that might interfere with the free working of the unconscious mind, such as reading serious materials. Wallas quoted the poet John Drinkwater about the way insights come about: 
Haunting the lucidities of life That are my daily beauty, move a theme Beating along my undiscovered mind. 
Next comes the illumination stage, when insight bursts forth with conciseness, suddenness, and immediate certainty. Wallas believed that the insight, the “happy idea,” was the culmination of a train of uncon- scious associations. These associations had to mature outside of conscious scrutiny until they were ready to surface. 
Wallas claimed that people could sometimes sense that an insight was brewing in their minds. The insight starts to make its appearance in fringe consciousness, giving people an intimation that the flash of illumination is nearby. At this point the insight might drift away and not evolve into consciousness. Or it might get interrupted by an intrusion that causes it to miscarry. That’s why if people feel this intimation arising while reading, they often stop and gaze out into space, waiting for the insight to appear. 
20 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Wallas warned of the danger of trying to put the insight into words too quickly, before it was fully formed. 
Finally, during the verification stage we test whether the idea is valid. If the insight is about a topic such as mathematics, we may need to con- sciously work out the details during this final stage. 
Wallas’s four-stage model of insight is still the way most people ex- plain how insight works. It’s a very satisfying explanation that has a ring of plausibility—until we examine it more closely. 
Wallas claimed that a preparation stage is necessary for insights to occur, but none of the five people discussed in Chapter One—the young cop, Martin Chalfie, Harry Markopolos, Michael Gottlieb, or I—spent any time preparing for an insight. Each insight came unexpectedly. Each was a surprise. 
Now, in all five cases the protagonists drew on their background and expertise, but that isn’t the same thing as deliberate preparation. The police officer had nothing to prepare as he sat in traffic. Chalfie would have had no reason to prepare for a biological marker. He wasn’t looking to improve his methods. Likewise, Markopolos wasn’t preparing to nail Bernie Madoff. He had to be goaded into examining Madoff’s financial results. Gottlieb wasn’t preparing to sound the alarm on the AIDS epi- demic. No one knew about AIDS or anticipated how virulent it would be. And I wasn’t preparing to reengineer my arrangement with my mechanic. The advice to begin by preparing wouldn’t have helped any of us. We wouldn’t have known what to prepare. 
It is easy to confuse preparation with expertise. After we know what the insight is, we can see how the person gaining it acquired special kinds of knowledge. These previous interests and experiences prepared the per- son’s mind to register the insight in ways that others missed. We can call this a generally prepared mind, a characteristic of Chalfie, Markopolos, and Gottlieb. None of the three would have gained his insight without years of special experience. A generally prepared mind is the same thing as having expertise. The young cop didn’t have much experience, but he did have a mind-set to be alert for criminals. (And I didn’t have any ex- perience worth considering.) 
THE FLASH OF ILLUMINATION 21 

Wallas, however, recommended that we have a specifically prepared mind by making deliberate preparations to solve a thorny problem. Ac- cording to Wallas, when we’re stuck and need to find an insight that will get us past an impasse, we should start with deliberate preparation. A few decades later this preparation activity was illustrated in one of the greatest achievements in science. James Watson and Francis Crick worked very hard to identify the structure of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and eventually dis- covered that it was a double helix. If they hadn’t gone through so much de- liberate and specific preparation, they wouldn’t have achieved their finding. 
While the idea of deliberate preparation appeals to our work ethic— and is, of course, crucial for many types of work—it was not a factor in the insights attained by the cop, Chalfie, Markopolos, Gottlieb, or me. So I don’t think deliberate preparation is necessary or even practical for many insights. 
One flaw in Wallas’s method is that his sample of cases was skewed. He only studied success stories. He didn’t consider all the cases in which people prepared very hard but got nowhere. In the DNA example, re- searchers who were more respected at the time than Watson and Crick, such as Rosalind Franklin and Linus Pauling, were also working hard to discover the structure of DNA but didn’t succeed. Deliberate and specific preparation doesn’t guarantee success. Therefore, I didn’t see how I could advise people to start with a preparation stage when so many insights are accidental and when specific preparation doesn’t reliably lead to breakthroughs. 
The incubation stage also doesn’t fit most of the Chapter One exam- ples. Gottlieb had time for his impressions to incubate between the dif- ferent AIDS patients he examined. I had a few hours before having dinner with my wife and coming up with my car key scheme. None of the others had any time to incubate. The cop saw the driver ash his car and right away knew something was wrong. Chalfie heard about the green fluores- cent protein and immediately saw the implications. Markopolos looked at the financial data and immediately sensed something was fishy. 
Whereas preparation appeals to our work ethic, incubation appeals to our play ethic. It feels like a welcome time-out. Lots of people can recall insights that suddenly came to them while they were taking showers, but 
22 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

I doubt that organizations could increase the rate of insights in their work- ers by having them double the number of showers they take. The incu- bation stage doesn’t seem necessary and often would be impossible. 
Then there’s the third stage of Wallas’s model, the flash of illumina- tion. Yes, we all had it, although Gottlieb arrived at it more slowly as he spotted the similarities among his patients. How does this flash of il- lumination work? Wallas describes it as the result of a train of uncon- scious associations. 
That explanation seems too magical to be satisfying. This was the pro- cess I wanted to examine further, the mystery I started pursuing. What happens during this third stage? If I were going to tell people more about the up arrow, I’d need a better account of the flash of illumination. 
What was I trying to explain, the illumination or the flash? Perhaps the “aha” experience, when everything finally snaps into place, marks the culmination of the insight process. Perhaps it isn’t the insight itself. 
We can use an analogy here: “aha” is to insight as orgasms are to con- ception. In both cases the experience is more noticeable than the achieve- ment, but the experience doesn’t guarantee the achievement, and the achievement can happen without the experience. 
So what mystery was I trying to solve? At times, I felt like a bull charg- ing forward at a swirling cape, hoping to make contact with a shadowy matador. 
Wallas’s four-stage model of insight isn’t a good fit with any of the five people in Chapter One. That doesn’t mean the model is wrong. Some aspects of it may be useful, but which ones? 
Most cognitive scientists talk about insight as moving from an im- passe state to a solution state. We hit an impasse, struggle for a while, and then find a way to overcome our mental block. This view is pretty much the same as Wallas’s first three stages. But I don’t see impasses with the cop, Chalfie, or any of the other cases in Chapter One. No one was stuck while trying to solve a problem. 
If I wanted to describe how the up arrow works, I’d need at least a vague definition, some criteria, for what counts as an insight. I’d need something better than getting past an impasse. 
THE FLASH OF ILLUMINATION 23 

AN UNEXPECTED SHIFT TO A BETTER STORY 
The five people in Chapter One were shifting to a better story about how things work. These weren’t entertainment stories. They were stories about what causes things to happen. The stories described the causes for past and present events (the young cop, Markopolos, Gottlieb) or ways to cause future outcomes (Chalfie as well as my car keys). These shifts weren’t about making minor adjustments or adding more details. The shifts changed some of the core beliefs the five people initially held. Dur- ing this transition some initial beliefs were abandoned or replaced. The shifts were discontinuous discoveries—unexpected transitions from a mediocre story to a better one. 
Sometimes the shift landed immediately on the better story, as in the cop, Chalfie, and car keys examples. Other times the shift was toward the better story, but took a while to get there. Harry Markopolos’s insight put him on the road to finding a better story about how Bernie Madoff was cheating. Similarly, Michael Gottlieb’s detection of an ominous pat- tern of symptoms put him and the medical community on the road to iden- tifying a new disease, AIDS, and the virus that caused it. Insights shift us toward a new story, a new set of beliefs that are more accurate, more comprehensive, and more useful. 
Our insights transform us in several ways. They change how we un- derstand, act, see, feel, and desire. They change how we understand. They transform our thinking; our new story gives us a different viewpoint. They change how we act. In some cases insights transform our abilities as well as our understanding; the Chalfie and car keys examples show how insights change our notions of what we can do. These shifts went beyond a richer story about how the world works. The new story was about how to make it work better, by using the green fluorescent protein in Chalfie’s case and by giving keys to a car mechanic in my own exam- ple. Insights transform how we see; we look for different things in keeping with our new story. Gottlieb examined his new patients differently once he picked up the AIDS pattern. Insights transform how we feel—what 
24 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

excites us or makes us nervous. The two police officers got amped up when they suspected they’d found a car thief. Markopolos began with dread that Madoff was more skillful in financial investments than he was, then shifted to skepticism, and then to outrage that fueled his cam- paign to uncover Madoff’s scam. Finally, insights change our desires; the new stories shift our goals, leading us to give up some ambitions and pursue others. Chalfie needed to find techniques for implanting the green fluorescent protein into the nerve cells of his worms. Markopolos needed to nail Bernie Madoff. Gottlieb needed to get to the bottom of a myste- rious disease. 
As a friend summarized all these transformations, “Insight is when it happens, everything that happens afterward is different.” Hilary Mantel made the same observation in Wolf Hall: “Insight cannot be taken back. You cannot return to the moment you were in before.” 
So I had a working definition of insight—an unexpected shift to a bet- ter story—along with the ways insights transform us. I also had some ideas about what makes insights unique. Compared with routine problem solving, insights aren’t conscious or deliberate. They come without warn- ing. Our minds do their heavy lifting without our awareness. Watson and Crick labored to build a model of DNA, but the eventual insight―that it was a double helix―came as a surprise even to them. 
Insights are unique in some other ways. When they do appear, they are coherent and unambiguous. They don’t come as part of a set of pos- sible answers. When we have the insight, we think, “Oh yes, that’s it.” We feel a sense of closure. This sense of closure produces a feeling of confidence in the insight. Wallas claimed that the flash of illumination results in a feeling of certainty. We aren’t picking an idea that seems better than others. Instead, we’re struck that this is the answer, the happy idea. We may even have an aesthetic reaction to the beauty of the insight. Watson and Crick felt that their double helix model was too beautiful not to be true. Chalfie may have had this experience when his new re- search agenda fell into place. Markopolos felt it when his puzzlement shifted into certainty that he had uncovered a clear case of fraud. Gottlieb 
THE FLASH OF ILLUMINATION 25 

had a grim sense of satisfaction when the new cases conformed to the pattern he had identified. The older police officer wanted to hug his partner. 
Now I was ready to pursue the mystery of what produces the flash of illumination. Yet the more I learned, the more complexity and confusion I experienced. I wasn’t sure if I would come up with anything useful. I didn’t have a sense that I was getting warmer. 
A NATURALISTIC INVESTIGATION 
When I started my investigation into the flash of illumination, I experi- enced all the usual doubts I have at the beginning of a project, plus some new ones. I hadn’t done any previous research on insight or even played around with the traditional insight tasks that cognitive scientists have used for almost a century. These puzzle tasks don’t seem to have any pos- sible solution until you find a way out of the impasse. 
But perhaps that could be an advantage. I wanted to explore how in- sights work in more natural settings. I could then examine the flash of il- lumination without getting trapped by all the constraints surrounding laboratory-based experiments. The puzzle tasks used in the laboratory held little interest for me. 
Twenty-five years earlier I had the same feelings when I set out to ex- amine the way people made decisions. I’d never done a decision making experiment or even taken a course in decision making. I was trying to solve a different mystery at that time: how people can make life-and-death de- cisions under extreme time pressure and uncertainty. Instead of working in a laboratory, I chose to study how people actually make these kinds of decisions. You can’t study that in a laboratory. 
I studied firefighters because they have to make good decisions in stressful situations. I didn’t give the firefighters any standard decision tasks. Instead, my fellow researchers and I interviewed the firefighters about their toughest challenges. We collected their best stories, and we probed those stories to learn more about the firefighters’ strategies. 
26 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

What we found surprised us. Our results didn’t fit any of the existing models of decision making. The firefighters weren’t trying to compare options to select the best. They didn’t have time. Instead, they relied on their experience, the patterns they had acquired over decades, to quickly size up situations and recognize the option most likely to work. 
The firefighters made rapid decisions by recognizing how the situations they encountered fit the patterns they had learned. The pattern-matching part of their decisions was fast and automatic. It was how they used their intuition to quickly identify an option that was likely to succeed. Then they evaluated their intuitions, not by comparing the option they recog- nized with others, but by consciously and deliberately imagining how it would fare if they carried it out. The firefighters relied on this strategy to make more than 80 percent of their tough decisions. 
Other researchers have replicated our findings and showed that dif- ferent specialists, such as military commanders and oil-rig managers, also rely on what we called the recognition-primed decision strategy for about 90 percent of their challenging decisions. These efforts helped to start the field of naturalistic decision making, which studies the way people think in natural settings, rather than how they are forced to think in laboratory experiments using artificial tasks. 
Studying how people think in natural settings unnerves many research psychologists. They question whether naturalistic studies are real science. For them, science depends on testing ideas under tightly controlled con- ditions. Naturalistic decision making researchers like me concentrate on the early stages of the scientific method to provide the ideas that can later get tested. We try to observe and understand phenomena such as how people make tough decisions and how they form insights. 
Traditional decision researchers hadn’t come up with the recogni- tional strategy because their laboratory work on decision making typi- cally studied novices trying to perform unfamiliar tasks. Their theories of decision making didn’t take expertise into account. Recognitional de- cisions depend on decades of experience to build up hundreds and thou- sands of patterns. 
THE FLASH OF ILLUMINATION 27 

And now, déjà vu. Almost all the studies of insight were taking place in laboratories and using artificial tasks. These studies were aimed at for- mulating and testing hypotheses. I saw a parallel between the field of in- sight and the field of decision making twenty-five years earlier, giving me some hope that a naturalistic study of insight might succeed. I didn’t have any idea of how insight works, so I wasn’t ready to test hypotheses. And that was the point. I could perform a naturalistic study of insight— explore the way people actually form insights—and if I were lucky, I might find some useful ideas in my stack of stories. 
The work with firefighters might suggest that insights are the same as intuitions, but they’re actually very different. Firefighters build up patterns that they apply in making rapid decisions in emergencies. Intuition is the use of patterns they’ve already learned, whereas insight is the discovery of new patterns. 
Although insight differs from intuition, the firefighter study influenced my thinking about insights twenty-five years later. Firefighters often changed their beliefs about a complex fire as they learned more details, usually adding those specific details into their story. The most dramatic scenarios, however, contained surprises that forced the firefighters to re- think what was going on and replace erroneous beliefs. The firefighters shifted the story they told themselves about what was happening inside the burning structures. 
Stories are a way we frame and organize the details of a situation. There are other types of frames besides stories, such as maps and even organizational wiring diagrams that show where people stand in a hier- archy. My work centers on stories because they are common ways we frame the events in the situations we encounter. These kinds of stories organize all kinds of details about a situation and depend on a few core beliefs we can call “anchors,” because they are fairly stable and anchor the way we interpret the other details. In some later research I found that most of these stories build on only three or four anchors. 
The cop’s anchors were the expensive car and the driver’s indifference to its upkeep. Chalfie’s anchors were the transparency of the worms, the 
28 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

fact that the green fluorescent protein could be made to glow, and the be- lief that proteins like this could be implanted in neurons inside his worms. Markopolos’s anchors were that investment funds that never lost money in the stock market were usually fraudulent, and that the method Madoff claimed to be using was too conservative to generate large profits. Gott- lieb’s anchors for the story he was forming were that he had encountered a disease that targeted gay men, that it devastated part of their immune systems, and that it left the victims vulnerable to all kinds of infections. 
Anchors can change as a person gets more information. Chalfie’s story got richer as he learned how to manufacture the green fluorescent protein and how to insert it into a variety of cells. Markopolos’s story evolved as he learned more about the kinds of fraud Madoff was committing. Gott- lieb came to learn that AIDS did not afflict only gay men. 
Actually, I wasn’t thinking of any of these ideas when I began inves- tigating the flash of illumination. I wasn’t thinking of firefighters or an- chors or the ways we frame and organize events. It is only now, with hindsight, that I appreciate how my earlier studies enabled me to form a richer explanation of how insights work. At the time what the earlier proj- ects with firefighters and others gave me was hope that I might be able to make a discovery here, even though I hadn’t done any experiments with insight puzzle problems, or perhaps because I had not done any of these kinds of studies. I was ready to examine cases of actual insights, starting with the clippings in my stack. 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL TRENCHES 
When field archaeologists want to explore the structures inside an unnat- ural hill, they don’t excavate the entire hill. That level of effort would be too costly and take too long. Instead, they dig a trench that gives them a snapshot of what’s inside the hill. It helps them assess whether the site has walls or housing materials or any other significant structures. The ar- chaeologists may judge that the hill is not worth further investigation, or they may decide that the site has enough potential for a fuller excavation. 
THE FLASH OF ILLUMINATION 29 

My research plan was like an archaeological trench. I didn’t conduct the kind of laboratory experiment that would constitute a traditional study of insights. Instead, I searched for insights of people who made an unexpected shift in their beliefs. I collected a set of incidents—120 ex- amples, including the small number in my original stack. Once I had as- sembled them, I could review them to see if I could find any themes. With luck, somewhere in those stories I would run across some clues to what was behind the flash of illumination. 
It took me more than half a year to compile my sample of 120 cases in my spare time. I didn’t do much interviewing because I found so many examples in the media. I relied heavily on books, especially those de- scribing innovations and discoveries. I also used newspaper and magazine articles. I drew on interviews I’d conducted over the previous thirty years and selected those in which people unexpectedly made radical shifts in their stories and beliefs about how things work. 
The books on innovation yielded a harvest of examples from science, inventions, business, and management. I searched through transcripts of interviews I had conducted with military decision makers. Books and ar- ticles about financial investment in the wake of the 2007–2008 financial collapse yielded many more examples, as did stories about medical dis- coveries. I trolled for examples in my discussions with professional col- leagues and even with family members. The 120 stories were the only data I had. I didn’t anticipate where these stories would lead or how they might fuse to create their own story. That came later as I was finishing the project. Perhaps as you read the insight stories in these early chapters, you will form a better picture than I had. 
My collection came together in a somewhat haphazard way. When I felt I could learn from an incident, I studied it further. Researchers in the future may come up with more systematic ways to assemble incidents, but at this point, doing an initial naturalistic study of insight, I just needed to gather observations. I needed to start digging. 
Most of the 120 stories are about successes, the same criticism I made of Graham Wallas. An investigator can pull together a bunch of success 
30 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

stories and conclude that a certain strategy, such as careful preparation, invariably results in insights. We won’t see the failures, the cases in which preparation didn’t pay off. To counter this weakness, late in my project I selected a small set of cases that each had a built-in control. These cases described not only the person who had the insight, but also another person who had access to the same data yet didn’t achieve the insight. That’s one of the criteria for insights: that others with the same information somehow miss the discovery. This control sample highlighted the strate- gies and traits that make a difference between success and failure. I’ll de- scribe this comparison later in the book in Part II. 
As I assembled the 120 examples of insights, I summarized each one in a short account, three pages or less, sometimes only a half page. I di- vided each account into three sections: background on the incident, the critical events that led to the insight, and the nature of the insight. 
Next, I coded the incidents to try to uncover patterns. I defined a set of coding categories. The list started small, but I added new features that I wanted to learn more about, and the set eventually grew to fourteen cat- egories as the project went on. This was a trench, not a controlled exper- iment. Its purpose was to explore insights. 
The categories were issues like whether the person struggled with an impasse (yes or no), whether the person had time to incubate (yes or no), whether the insight was sudden or gradual, and so forth. Once I had de- fined the categories, my research assistant, Andrea Jarosz, and I inde- pendently coded each incident using each of the fourteen categories. Our ratings had a 78 percent rate of agreement, which wasn’t a bad start. Then we discussed the cases on which we disagreed and adjusted our criteria to reduce confusion. I also added more details to some of the stories. By the end our interrater agreement was 98 percent. 
Eventually I was able to sort these 120 cases into five different strate- gies for gaining insights: connections, coincidences, curiosities, contra- dictions, and creative desperation. Did the incident rely on a person making a connection? Did the person notice a coincidence as a trigger for the insight? Was the insight triggered by some curiosity—an odd fact 
THE FLASH OF ILLUMINATION 31 

or event? Did it depend on seeing a contradiction? Or was the person stuck, desperately seeking some way out of an impasse? 
All the 120 cases fit one of these strategies. Most relied on more than one of the five strategies. But which of the five was the best strategy, the “real” one that explained insights? Or should all five be combined into one general strategy? Neither of these approaches seemed promising to me as I struggled to find a pattern in the data, but you can judge that for yourself. The next four chapters will describe the five candidate strategies. We’ll start with the prime suspect. 
