SOME INSIGHTS ARE ACCIDENTAL, the result of unplanned happenstance or of being in the right place at the right time. Think about the young cop or Martin Chalfie sitting in his lunch seminar. Others are deliberate, aris- ing when people are stuck and need some sort of breakthrough. In his work on chess grand masters the Dutch psychologist Adriaan de Groot used the term “creative desperation” to describe some of the brilliant strategies that players invented when they got into trouble. The clock would be winding down, they’d be in a tough situation, none of the plausible moves worked, and then, out of desperation, they would find an unorthodox line of play that would save them, gambling on some leverage they might never have tried to use if any of the ac- ceptable moves had looked promising. 
Almost all the scientific research on insights, as noted earlier, takes place in laboratories using puzzles designed to stymie the subjects. Some of the subjects get stuck and have to give up. Others struggle, feel lost, and then have unexpected 
79 
80 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

insights about the solutions. To research psychologists who have carefully studied the nature of insight, this theme of creative desperation is the epit- ome of insightful problem solving. It is the paradigm they use in their ex- periments because there is a solution, a right answer, that is discovered through a flash of illumination rather than steady analysis. These are the kind of situations that Graham Wallas had in mind when he formulated his four-stage theory. 
Creative desperation, a fifth insight strategy, is very different from con- necting ideas or noticing coincidences or curiosities or contradictions. Cre- ative desperation requires finding a way out of a trap that seems inescapable. 
FIGHTING FIRE WITH FIRE 
Creative desperation does not, of course, just happen in the laboratory or over the chessboard. Sometimes it is a matter of life and death, as was the case in Mann Gulch, Montana (see photograph), on August 5, 1949, when Wagner Dodge found a way to escape a forest fire. A team of fifteen smokejumpers parachuted into western Montana that afternoon to control a forest fire. Less than two hours later, twelve of the smokejumpers lay dead or dying after being trapped by a blowup—a sudden and unexpected firestorm resulting from a collision of fire and winds. A blowup to a typical forest fire is like a hurricane to an ocean storm. 
The team had been dropped at the top of Mann Gulch on an extremely hot day in the midst of a dry season. Their plan was to hike down on the north slope of Mann Gulch (on the left in the photo) to the Missouri River and cross over to the south slope (on the right) where the fire was burning. They wanted to attack the fire from below because fires spread upward and they didn’t want to put themselves at unnecessary risk. The Missouri River runs horizontally at the bottom of this photograph of Mann Gulch. 
Wagner Dodge, the thirty-three-year-old team leader, was described as taciturn, even by his wife, who greatly loved and respected him. “He said to me when we were married, ‘You do your job and I’ll do mine, and we’ll get along just fine.’” Dodge had been with the Forest Service 
CREATIVE DESPERATION 81 
 
for nine seasons before the Mann Gulch fire, and he had been a smoke- jumper foreman for four years. As the leader of this crew, he was supposed to go through a three-week training course with them, but at the last minute he was reassigned to a maintenance task. He and his crew barely got to know each other before being dropped into Mann Gulch. 
They hiked most of the way down Mann Gulch, but then Wagner Dodge saw a bit of smoke down at the bottom of his part of the valley, the north slope. He immediately recognized that somehow the fire had “spotted,” that is, the fire on the south slope had sent sparks and embers that were carried by the wind to start a new fire, a spot fire, on the north slope, directly downhill from them. A cascade of spot fires can quickly lead to a blowup, and that was about to happen. 
82 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Dodge could see the beginnings of a fire way down below, near the river. Dodge knew that this fire was going to come roaring up the north slope of the valley where he and his team were located. It would likely kill them all. 
Dodge ordered his team to run for safety back to the top of the hill. However, when he looked back, he realized they wouldn’t make it. The fire was gaining on them and was picking up speed. In his book about Mann Gulch, Young Men and Fire, Norman Maclean used one of the most heartbreaking graphs I have ever seen to illustrate the plight of the firefight- ers. My legs get weak just studying the curves. 

The bottom axis shows the time sequence. Just half an hour passes once the fire crosses over to the bottom of Mann Gulch until it catches the fastest runner. The fire is the dotted line; the smokejumpers are the solid line. The graph shows the race between them. The smokejumpers were descending the valley until they reached Point 6, which is where Dodge saw the first signs of smoke and they reversed their course at 5:45. The vertical axis shows the distance above and below Point 6. 
CREATIVE DESPERATION 83 

At Point 7, at 5:53, the crew members drop their tools in their mad scramble. The fire is now only a minute behind them, driven by 30 mph winds. The fire is 30 feet high by some estimates, 200 feet high by others. Dodge described it as a wall of flame. It was like a tsunami, made of flames instead of water. 
The fire moves slowly at first, not reaching Point 6 until 5:49, nineteen minutes after it spotted at the bottom of Mann Gulch. Unfortunately, the fire picks up speed. As the valley gets steeper, the fire can move faster but the legs of the smokejumpers have to work harder. At its fastest the fire is traveling about 660 feet a minute. The last portion of the graph, on the right-hand side, the end of the race for the smokejumpers, is a 76 per- cent slope. 
Norman Maclean had once been caught in a forest fire himself. He survived a close call and offered his reflections on his experience: “Burn- ing to death on a mountainside is dying at least three times, not two times as has been said before—first, considerably ahead of the fire, you reach the verge of death in your boots and your legs; next, as you fail, you sink back in the region of strange gases and red and blue darts where there is no oxygen and here you die in your lungs; then you sink in prayer into the main fire that consumes, and if you are a Catholic about all that re- mains of you is your cross.” 
I had a chance to visit Mann Gulch several decades after the fire of August 1949. I was part of a team investigating the 1994 fatal South Canyon fire in Colorado. Our team met in Missoula, Montana. As a side trip, some of the researchers went to Mann Gulch, taking boats up the Missouri and hiking up the valley. When we got high enough and the canyon got steep enough, I tried running up the 76 percent slope to see what it felt like. At the time I was in moderately good shape—I had been running five miles a few times a week, an eight-minute/mile pace, nothing special. I wasn’t even close to the physical condition the smokejumpers were in. As I ran up Mann Gulch, it didn’t take me long to become exhausted. I imagined a forest fire at my heels. I imagined the panic, the adrenaline. I still couldn’t make it very far. 
84 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

The slowest smokejumper was caught at 5:56 in Maclean’s recon- struction of the event, eleven minutes after the crew reversed its course at Point 6. The others were caught in the next minute. Two smokejumpers did make it to safety, but the other twelve died. Look at the graph again, at the cruel upward slope of the fire. 
Wagner Dodge survived through creative desperation—an ingenious counterintuitive tactic. To escape the fire, he started a fire. At 5:55 in Maclean’s timeline, Dodge lit a fire in front of him, knowing that this es- cape fire would race uphill and he could take refuge in its ashes. He wet his handkerchief from his canteen and put it over his mouth and nose, then dived facedown into the ashes of the escape fire to isolate himself from any flammable vegetation. He was saved with less than a minute to spare. But he could not persuade anyone to join him in the ashes. None of the others could make sense of what he was doing. He had invented a new tactic, but he never had a chance to describe it to his crew. As one of the two survivors put it, upon seeing Dodge light a fire, “we thought he must have gone nuts.” 
I have read several accounts of this incident, but none of them explains Dodge’s insight. He invented the idea of an escape fire as an act of creative desperation. So I am forced to imagine where the insight came from. 
I imagine Dodge and the crew running for their lives, dropping their tools, realizing they are trapped. I try to imagine Dodge’s beliefs about what is going on. Four beliefs in particular seem to anchor Dodge’s under- standing. One anchor is the uphill slope. It favors the fire, not the runners, and it is getting steeper. A second anchor is the fire behind me. It is picking up speed. Perhaps a third anchor is any island of safety I might find. If I could get to the top of the ridge, the fire would stop racing after me. Or if I could find a rocky patch, the fire might leave me alone because it wouldn’t have any fuel. I see a rocky area way up ahead (the other two survivors reached these rocks and took protection there), but I know I can’t get there in time. It is about 200 yards away, uphill yards, with the fire perhaps thirty seconds behind me. A fourth anchor is the heavy dry grass I am running through, bunchgrass and cheatgrass. It is the fuel that the fire is eating. 
CREATIVE DESPERATION 85 

I don’t spend any time thinking about how to change the slope of the valley walls or beat the fire back. These anchors are part of my situation, but beyond my control. I can’t reach the rocky areas on the ridge before the fire will catch me. But maybe I can do something to this last anchor, to the fuel. How can I neutralize the fuel? Of course! I can burn it! Fire, my enemy, can also be my friend. I light the escape fire to race up the slope ahead of me, and I dive into the hot ashes, my sanctuary from the blowup. 
In my imaginary account of Dodge’s thinking, he is looking for any assumption that he can overturn. When he finds one, the grass fuel, he has an escape plan. 
DISARMING A FLAWED ASSUMPTION 
Dodge later testified about his actions but didn’t provide an explanation for his insight about the escape fire. So we can never know what went through his mind, but there is an analogous case that seems to follow the same script. In May 2003, Aron Ralston, an American mountain climber, was hiking through some canyons in Utah. He fell into a crevice and his right arm became pinned by a boulder. Ralston was trapped for over five days, and he recounted the ordeal in his book, Between a Rock and a Hard Place. James Franco played the role of Aron Ralston in the movie version of the ordeal, 127 Hours. Franco did a wonderful job of conveying Ral- ston’s frustration and his anger at himself for failing to let anyone know his plans for the trip. 
At first, Ralston tried to use a small pocketknife to carve away the rock and free his arm, but with no success. All he accomplished was dulling the blade. After a few days he accidentally cut into the thumb of his trapped arm and confirmed that the trapped part had died from lack of circulation. It was no longer worth saving. It might even be poisoning him. He was out of food, almost out of water, and completely isolated. He fully expected to die. 
He gave up trying to free his arm and instead tried to amputate it in order to free himself, but by this time his knife was too dull. It would 
86 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

never be able to cut through the bones of his forearm. He truly was trapped. 
At one point he lost his composure and gave in to an emotional out- burst. He tried to yank his arm free of the rock that encased it, thrashing back and forth. During this tantrum he felt his right arm bend unnaturally, and that was the hint he needed to make a discovery. He didn’t have to cut through the bones of his arm. The boulder had pinned his arm so tightly that he could snap the bones. Once he did, he used a smaller blade to cut through the tissue (and, most painfully, the nerve bundle). He man- aged to free himself and find help. 
As soon as Ralston shifted his goal from freeing his healthy arm to freeing himself from his dead arm, he discovered that the boulder was no longer his enemy. It was now his friend. The boulder enabled him to es- cape by providing the solid leverage he needed to break the bones in his arm. Similarly, by shifting his focus from the fire behind him to the fuel in front of him, Wagner Dodge made fire his friend. I see both cases as deliberate insights achieved by desperate men trying to find any leverage points they could use to save their lives. They both jettisoned the assump- tions trapping them. 
CHERYL’S KISSES 
Deliberate insights rarely have the drama or the terror facing Wagner Dodge and Aron Ralston. More often the desperation resembles a chess player mired in a bad position, rather than a person struggling to avoid imminent death. Many years ago, Cheryl Cain, the financial manager of the research company I owned at the time, needed the employees to fill out time cards at the end of the week. Unfortunately, many people weren’t complying. (Confession: I was one of the worst offenders.) Cheryl had to chase us down. Because so much of our work received government funding, she lived in fear of a surprise government visit and audit. The officers of my company issued stern directives to get people to fill out the time sheets, but to no avail. 
CREATIVE DESPERATION 87 

One day Cheryl talked to her mother about the problem. Her mother suggested, “Why not find a way to reward them, instead of harassing them?” Cheryl came up with the idea of Hershey kisses—small, cheap, and easily distributed. Workers got a kiss when they did fill out their time cards by the end of the week. All of a sudden people went crazy beating the deadline. They figured they had to fill the time card in anyway, so why not do it on time and get the kiss? Workers on travel would call in: “My plane is delayed, but I’ll have it done Monday by 10:00 A.M. Will that be okay?” Cheryl usually granted them dispensation. The whole dy- namic around time cards changed. 
By offering an appropriate incentive, Cheryl gained our compliance. I call it the VIP Treatment, for an incentive that is visible, immediate, and personal. Cheryl had been trapped by the assumption that she had to cajole and threaten. Once freed from that assumption, she could find the right incentive to get us to do her bidding. 
Notice that creative desperation is more conscious and deliberate than spotting connections, coincidences, curiosities, and contradictions. People aren’t accidentally stumbling onto insights. They are actively searching for them. 
Another example of creative desperation came from a conversation I had with a friend of mine, David Charlton. When he was a senior manager at Corning Incorporated, a world leader in glass and ceramics, Charlton reviewed a concept for a new way to create reactor vessels for processing chemicals that produce heat in reactions. A group of chemical engineers had criticized the materials used in this reactor, arguing that it wouldn’t work because of heat transfer. The new material was a fusion of two dif- ferent kinds of glasses, and the chemical engineers warned that the data were clear: the heat transfer properties of the glass would result in poor dissipation of high heat during the chemical reactions. 
Charlton thought the project had a lot of merit so he tried to find some way around the objections of the chemical engineers. He noticed an un- usual feature about this product—the glass walls of the reactor were very thin and the internal volumes were very small—orders of magnitude thinner 
88 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

and smaller—compared to conventional reactors. Perhaps the historical experience on heat transfer in large volume reactors wouldn’t apply to glass reactors this thin and small. 
Charlton was right—the historical experiences were misleading. New tests showed that the heat transfer issue wasn’t a showstopper after all. Charlton’s insight, like the others in this chapter, was to find an assumption that was trapping him and could be overturned. 
NAPOLEON FINDS A PRESSURE POINT 
In 1793, Napoleon Bonaparte faced the issue of how to attack a much stronger Anglo-Spanish force occupying the city of Toulon. The fate of the new French Republic depended on repelling the invaders, but the French military commander at Toulon was stymied. 
Toulon, a port city on the Mediterranean, was the primary naval arsenal of the French Republic and its main southern port. Following the French Revolution in 1789, the French Republic struggled to consolidate its au- thority. Insurrections broke out in a number of French cities, including Toulon. The opponents of the Republic sought to restore the monarchy. The Republican forces had driven out the royalist insurrectionists in Toulon, only to be beaten back by a stronger royalist force that occupied Toulon and requested help from outside forces. 
On August 28, 1793, an Anglo-Spanish fleet landed 13,000 troops to defend Toulon. It took control of the great naval arsenal and captured al- most half the French Navy. Unless the Republicans could repel that force, they’d have to concede the control of the seas to the British. Worse, roy- alists in other French areas would be encouraged to join the revolt. Already the royalists in Toulon swore allegiance to a young Louis XVII as the new king of France. 
The French Republic desperately needed to drive out the Anglo-Spanish occupiers. The Republican army had besieged Toulon, but without effect because the Anglo-Spanish forces were resupplied by sea. The invaders were too strong, too numerous, and too well defended to be defeated by force. 
CREATIVE DESPERATION 89 

Napoleon relied on creative desperation to invent a new tactic. This victory in 1793 moved Napoleon from obscurity to fame and power. Na- poleon had arrived at Toulon as an artillery captain. He left as a brigadier general. He was only twenty-four years old. 
He found a central assumption he could jettison: he didn’t have to overpower the invaders or force them to surrender. He didn’t even have to attack them. He just needed to get them to leave Toulon. And he could do that by disrupting their resupply route. In studying contour maps, Na- poleon noticed two small, lightly guarded forts, l’Eguillette and Balaguier, on a hill overlooking the Toulon harbor. The forts had little value for di- rectly attacking the invaders in Toulon, but Napoleon saw how he could use these forts to control movement in and out of the harbor and prevent the invaders from getting supplies. 
The little forts on the hill didn’t have enough firepower to be much of a threat against resupply ships, but Napoleon knew how to remedy that by using light artillery, a class of weapon that was still relatively new. Unlike the cumbersome heavy cannons that were the mainstay of artillery power, light artillery was much easier to transport. Animals (or soldiers) could roll it up the hill to l’Eguillette and Balaguier. Napoleon had made a study of the capabilities of light artillery. Remember, he was an artillery captain. His attention was drawn to l’Eguillette and Balaguier because he was look- ing at the battlefield through the eyes of a light artillery enthusiast. 
Just as Admirals Yamamoto and Stark saw the implications of the Battle of Taranto for Pearl Harbor, Napoleon was aware of the American tactics during the Revolutionary War for independence from Britain. To lift the siege of Boston in 1776, Henry Knox, an artillery officer with George Washington’s Continental Army, dragged light cannons up Dor- chester Heights. When the British down below realized these cannons could cut them off from their navy and from reliable supplies, they quickly sailed away. In 1781, the same thing happened at the siege of Yorktown. The French navy cut off the British troops in town from their navy at sea, and the British army surrendered to George Washington, ending the war. Napoleon knew that the besieged British troops at Toulon would worry about getting separated from their naval resupply. 
90 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

The commander of the French Republic forces, Jean François Carteaux, laughed at Napoleon’s plan. Carteaux was trapped by the assumption that his army would have to capture Toulon and force the invaders to surrender. That assumption anchored his war plans, and he was unable to let go of it. He didn’t have Napoleon’s flexible mind. 
It wasn’t until Carteaux was fired because of his failure to dislodge the invaders and was replaced by a more sympathetic general that Napoleon got the chance to use his tactic. It worked just as he expected (although he was wounded in the thigh by a bayonet during the assault on the hill). Once the French took control of the two small forts on the hill, the British commander at Toulon quickly sailed away with all the invading army. Napoleon had triumphed and was on his way as one of the greatest tactical military commanders of all time. He went on to win fifty out of fifty-four battles, often against larger armies, until his defeat at Waterloo. 
These incidents of creative desperation (Wagner Dodge at Mann Gulch, Aron Ralston trapped by the boulder, Cheryl Cain’s kisses, David Charlton and the new coating, and Napoleon Bonaparte at Toulon) seem to rely on the same strategy to escape from fixation. These people resemble the participants in psychology experiments who reach an impasse and have to reexamine their assumptions in order to break free. A total of 29 out of my 120 cases fit this creative desperation category, almost a quarter. But how can we reconcile these cases with the others? 
