INOTICED SOMETHING ODD as I thumbed through the stories: I had five in- sight strategies, and two of them worked in opposite directions. They weren’t just different from each other. They seemed to be reverse activities. No wonder I couldn’t synthesize the strategies. 
When faced with creative desperation, we try to find a weak belief that is trapping us. We want to jettison this belief so that we can escape from fixation and from impasse. In contrast, when using a contradiction strategy, we center on the weak belief. We take it seriously instead of explaining it away or trying to jettison it. We use it to rebuild our story. 
Look at some of the creative desperation stories. Wagner Dodge running for his life hit upon the idea that he could get rid of the tall grass, depriving the forest fire of its fuel. His insight suggested an unconventional way to eliminate the grass. He set it on fire. Aron Ralston, trapped by the boulder, gave up his goal of saving or extricating his right arm and gave up his goal of using his knife to cut through his arm bones. Instead, he used the leverage from the boulder to snap the bones. Cheryl Cain, irritated with the people in my company who wouldn’t fill out their time cards at the end of the week, gave up on threats and replaced them with kisses. Napoleon at Toulon discarded the assumption that the French would have to overpower the invading British-Spanish forces. He merely had to threaten their resupply lines to make them sail away. 
101 
102 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Now compare these with the contradiction stories. John Snow started having doubts that cholera was spread by bad air—the miasma theory— when his Tilt! reflex was triggered by contrary evidence. Some people came down with cholera, but others didn’t, even though they all breathed the same air. Snow’s own autopsies showed that cholera victims had healthy lungs but ravaged digestive tracts, more evidence that contra- dicted the miasma theory. Snow could have explained away these anom- alies. Our natural tendency is to explain away the deviant data points. And for good reason. Most of the time that deviant data point is wrong or else it doesn’t really apply to our situation. It is a safer strategy to dis- count the anomalies, but that safe strategy doesn’t yield insights. We arrive at insights when we take the anomaly seriously, as Snow did. He found a different frame, a different story. He speculated that contaminated water was spreading cholera. This perspective guided him to collect data that others ignored. 
Look back at Einstein’s discovery, the way he developed his theory of special relativity. For a decade Einstein engaged in thought experiments about light beams, sometimes uncovering anomalies and inconsistencies. For instance, if he rode a light beam, then he would be moving at the speed of light. From his perch on that light beam a second light beam would move away from him at the speed of light. Yet nothing can move faster than light, so Einstein had found a contradiction. The easy answer is to explain this anomaly away by insisting that the second light beam wouldn’t really move away from him at the speed of light. Instead of try- ing to explain it away, however, Einstein took it seriously. And to do that, he had to revise some of the other beliefs, the other anchors that seemed much firmer, in particular the Newtonian view that space and time were constant. If we make the speed of light the constant, then time slows down the faster we move, lengths contract, and masses increase. We enter the world of special relativity. 
The contradiction path to insights seems to follow a common script: we encounter an anomaly, we resist the temptation to discard it, we give it credence and imagine that it is valid, and then we revise the rest of our beliefs to make it all fit. Usually we have to discard some of our 
THE LOGIC OF DISCOVERY 103 

earlier beliefs, even major ones that have anchored our understanding up to now. We give up the notions of space and time as fixed entities. We give up miasma theory. We continue with this line of reasoning until we arrive at a new frame that has some of the old anchors, but also centers on the anomaly. 
My sample had 45 contradiction insights, triggered by an anomaly or an inconsistency. The person who had the insight explored the anomaly rather than explaining it away in 42 of these cases. The other 3 incidents didn’t have enough detail to assign a code. In none of the contradiction insights did the person explain away the anomaly. That’s not how con- tradiction insights work. 
The investors, Eisman, Paulson, Burry, Lippmann, and Park, seemed to follow the same path as they resisted the gravitational pull of the financial bubble. They hit a contradiction between the extreme confidence of the mortgage and Wall Street communities that housing prices would con- tinue to rise and their own data points suggesting that the end was in sight. The investors anchored on the anomalies they uncovered, even though their conclusions were inconsistent with the dominant views on Wall Street, and they worked out the implications from there. They sensed that the contra- diction was important. It was an opportunity rather than an inconvenience. 
Both the contradiction cases and the cases of creative desperation di- rected people’s attention to outliers—important beliefs that weren’t firmly supported. However, in the desperation cases people did not look for ways to reframe their understanding around the weak, anomalous anchor. Just the reverse. People who are in desperate straits attack the weak anchor instead of embracing it. In times of desperation, we actively search for an assumption we can reverse. We don’t seek to imagine the implications if the assumption was valid. Rather, we try to improve the situation by eliminating the assumption. 
So now I had distinguished two different paths to insight. 
• They spring from different motivations—wanting to escape from a bad situation versus wanting to rethink conventional wisdom. 
104 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

• • 
They have different triggers—searching for a flawed assumption versus encountering an inconsistency. They rely on different activities—replacing the flawed assumption versus building on the weak assumption that leads to the inconsistency. 
They also have some similarities. These insights are disruptive in that they don’t let us retain our comfortable beliefs. Instead we have to modify the core beliefs that anchor our understanding. We abandon some beliefs/ anchors and revise others. The two paths also lead to the same kinds of outcomes. We change what we understand. In addition, we sometimes change our ideas about the actions we can take, the way we see situations, how we feel about things, and what we desire. 
The diagram of a Triple Path Model of insight tries to capture these features. It is a Triple Path Model because the remaining strategies, con- nections, coincidences, and curiosities are combined in the third path, which is shown as the middle column. 
 
THE LOGIC OF DISCOVERY 105 

The connection path is different from the desperation path or the con- tradiction path. We’re not attacking or building on weak anchors. When we make connections or notice coincidences or curiosities, we add a new anchor to our beliefs and then work out the implications. Usually the new anchor comes from a new piece of information we receive. 
Martin Chalfie followed this path when he learned about the green fluorescent protein. He combined the idea of those proteins with his translucent worms and discovered a new research direction. The green fluorescent protein was a new anchor that Chalfie added to the mix. 
Charles Darwin followed the same path upon reading Malthus’s work on how populations grow to the point at which members have to compete for scarce resources such as food and water. This notion of competition for scarce resources was a new anchor that helped Darwin fit his theory of evolution together. Malthus’s theory didn’t contradict any of Darwin’s ideas, nor was Darwin desperately searching for a breakthrough. He just appreciated what would happen if he tossed Malthus into the mix of ideas he was considering. 
Both Admiral Stark and Admiral Yamamoto, an American and a Jap- anese, recognized the implications of the Battle of Taranto. Aircraft car- riers could launch a surprise attack on a naval fleet. What had seemed a safe harbor could be an immobilizing trap. This aircraft carrier tactic added a new anchor to their frames for planning to destroy a naval force. 
Alison Gopnik seized on her two-year-old son’s comment that pineap- ple in kirsch was yucky/yummy to add a new anchor to her method for studying infant intelligence. The comment didn’t contradict anything she knew; it gave her an idea for probing the way fourteen- and eighteen- month-old babies think. 
Sometimes the new anchor comes from seeing a coincidence. Carlos Finlay spotted a coincidence between outbreaks of yellow fever and the Culex mosquito. He treated the mosquito as a new anchor, a new and crit- ical part of the frame for explaining how yellow fever spreads. 
I’ve combined the connections, coincidences, and curiosities in the Triple Path Model. They have the same dynamic: to build on a new potential 
106 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

anchor. They have the same trigger: our thinking is stimulated when we notice the new anchor. Coincidences and curiosities aren’t insights in themselves; they start us on the path to identifying a new anchor that we connect to the other beliefs we hold. Connections, coincidences, and cu- riosities have the same activity: to combine the new anchor with others. This path to insight doesn’t force us to abandon other anchors. It lets us build a new story that shifts our understanding. This path has a different motivation, a different trigger, and a different activity from the contra- diction and the creative desperation paths. Nevertheless, like the other two paths, the outcome is the same: an unexpected shift in the story. 
This shift isn’t a minor adjustment. It means changing the core com- ponents, the anchors, used in the story. With contradictions and creative desperation, some of the previous anchors are discarded. With connec- tions, a new anchor is added. In all the paths the anchors in the story after we make an insight are different from the ones we started with. 
Each of the three paths, the contradiction path, the connection path, and the creative desperation path, gets sparked in a different way. And each operates in a different fashion: to embrace an anomaly that seems like a weak anchor in a frame, to overturn that weak anchor, or to add a new anchor. Future work on insight is likely to uncover other paths to in- sight besides the three shown in the diagram. 
The bottom of the diagram of the Triple Path Model shows different routes to the outcome. It shows some direct routes from the three strate- gies, but also some crossovers. That’s because many of the insights in my sample relied on more than one path. For example, Carlos Finlay no- ticed a coincidence between Culex mosquitoes and yellow fever. Then, with the mosquito hypothesis in a dormant stage, Walter Reed spotted a contradiction between miasma theory and yellow fever: the instance where one convict died and the others lived even though they shared the same air, clothes, and bedding. Finally, Walter Reed’s team encountered a new anchor: the incubation period inside the mosquitoes. When they connected an incubation period to the mix, they showed that mosquitoes do spread yellow fever. 
THE LOGIC OF DISCOVERY 107 

Multiple paths are the rule, not the exception. The diagram doesn’t show all possible blends, which would get complicated. Most of the blends relied at some point on the connection path, and so I have por- trayed the other two paths joining the connection path. There were only a few cases that drew on both the contradiction path and the creative desperation path. 
With the Triple Path Model, I feel that I’ve solved the mystery behind the flash of illumination. Of course, that isn’t a mystery that can be solved. It doesn’t have a “right” answer. It isn’t like John Snow discovering that cholera is spread by contaminated water or Harry Markopolos concluding that Bernie Madoff was doing something illegal. Those questions do have a right answer that can be verified. 
Nevertheless, I accomplished more than I expected. I’m satisfied that I have a fuller picture of how insights work. The best we can do when faced with challenges like explaining the origins of insight is to move the posts forward, and I believe I’ve done that. I believe I’ve moved beyond Graham Wallas’s four-stage account of preparation, incubation, illumi- nation, and verification, and beyond any of the other accounts of insight that I’d read about. I did it by puzzling over the stories, not by grinding out the data analysis. 
While the Triple Path Model isn’t the last word on insight, I see it as the next word. It seems like a plausible answer to the question about how the up arrow in the performance equation works. It feels like a richer, more comprehensive, and more useful account. In Part III, we’ll examine what the Triple Path Model says about increasing insights. 
The Triple Path Model shows why earlier accounts aren’t wrong as much as they are incomplete. They restrict themselves to a single path. Researchers and theorists such as Wallas who describe insight as escaping from fixation and impasses are referring to the creative desperation path. Researchers who emphasize seeing associations and combinations of ideas are referring to the connection path. Researchers who describe in- sight as reformulating the problem or restructuring how people think have gravitated to the contradiction path. None of them are wrong. The Triple 
108 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Path Model of insight illustrates why people seem to be talking past each other. It’s because they’re on different paths. 
Now that we have a fuller picture of how insights work, it’s time to turn to the dark side of insights, to the forces that stifle the discovery pro- cess. It’s time to turn to the second mystery that captured my attention. What stops people from having more insights? 
