WHEN WE NOTICE A COINCIDENCE, we may not be sure what to make of it. Is it just an accident, or is some deeper pattern at work? Ob- serving a coincidence means that we’ve spotted some events that seem related to each other even though they don’t seem to have any obvious causal link. 
Coincidences are chance concurrences that should be ignored except that every so often they provide us with an early warning about a new pattern. When Michael Gottlieb encountered a second and then a third patient with a com- promised immune system, he might have dismissed it. Instead he became sus- picious. Something was going on, something he didn’t understand, and he needed to monitor it more carefully. Gottlieb didn’t believe his patients had anything to do with each other. But the coincidence in their symptoms seemed important. And the men were all gay. Was there any significance in that? Quickly, the coincidence turned into a pattern, the deadly pattern of AIDS. 
We tend to notice coincidences, associations we don’t fully understand, based on relationships we can’t articulate. People who can pick up on trends, spot patterns, wonder about irregularities, and notice coincidences are an im- portant resource. They may often be wrong, so we shouldn’t automatically be- lieve them even if they feel very confident. Nevertheless, they should be listened to, rather than ridiculed, because they just might be on to something. 
45 
46 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

At first, I was unsure what to make of the incidents in my research sample that were triggered by coincidences. They didn’t immediately re- sult in a better story. Instead they shook people loose from the initial sto- ries they had held. I decided to count these incidents as insights because they sent people on a road that eventually led to a better story. 
THE GREATEST ASTRONOMICAL DISCOVERY OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY 
Consider the case of Jocelyn Bell Burnell, an Irish astrophysicist who turned a coincidence into a Nobel Prize. Her father was the architect for the Armagh Observatory southwest of Belfast, and she used to accompany him during inspection visits starting when she was seven or eight years old. She remembers being sent to crawl around in the rafters searching for leaks in the roof. 
As a teenager she became interested in astronomy, but she also liked a good night’s sleep and couldn’t imagine going into a field where she’d have to stay up all night to collect data. Then she found out about radio astronomy and X-ray astronomy, which allowed researchers to collect data during the day. So she’d be able to collect data without being sleep deprived. 
When Burnell was a graduate student in astronomy at Cambridge Uni- versity in the late 1960s, she built her own radio telescope (a device that evolved from World War II radar), using 120 miles of cable in a four- acre site. The data came out on pen recorders making squiggly lines on moving chart paper—like a lie detector, but for stars instead of criminals. 
Burnell was twenty-three years old when she started her thesis project in 1968 to find mysterious objects called quasars, very distant objects that emitted a lot of energy. 
In analyzing the data, she had to distinguish between the squiggles caused by quasars and those caused by other sources of radio interference. And then she noted a different burst activity: “There was another bit of squiggle that didn’t make sense. It took up about a quarter-inch out of 400 feet of chart paper. I think the first few times I saw it, I noted it with a question mark. But your brain remembers things you don’t realize it re- 
COINCIDENCES AND CURIOSITIES 47 

members. By about the fourth or fifth time I came across this signal, my brain said, ‘You’ve seen something like this before.’” 
To spread this new signal out and inspect it, she had to get more than a quarter inch of recording. She had to run the paper at high speed for five minutes at the appropriate time of day and then back at normal speed. She couldn’t leave the machine at high speed throughout the day because doing so would consume too much paper. 
She did that for a month and captured a detailed trace of this new type of signal. To her surprise, the burst of activity looked like a period of un- usually regular pulses. She wondered what caused it and worried that there was something wrong with the equipment. But the maintenance technicians checked, and the activity wasn’t crossed wires and it wasn’t interference and it wasn’t a satellite or a signal bouncing off a corrugated steel building. So what was it? 
The signal pulsed very regularly, once every 1.339 seconds. Later, she was looking at a completely different part of the sky and again saw some- thing strange. Again she came into the observatory (this time at 2:00 A.M.), switched on the high speed for the paper, “and in came blip, blip blip, this time one and a quarter seconds apart, in a different part of the sky. That was great. That was the sweet moment. That was eureka.” So the first set of odd squiggles wasn’t an anomaly. Soon after, she found a third example, and then a fourth. 
So as a graduate student, Burnell discovered pulsars, which we now know are rapidly spinning neutron stars. They are the leftovers of super- nova explosions and are massive but very small. They weigh as much as the sun but are only a dozen miles wide. 
Soon after she and her advisor announced her finding, radio astronomers around the world were redirecting their equipment to search for pulsars. It became a bit of a craze, like a gold rush. The publication of this finding listed Anthony Hewish, Burnell’s advisor, as first author. Hewish received a Nobel Prize in 1974, primarily for the discovery of pulsars. 
The Nobel Committee came under some criticism for its omission of Burnell, who did receive many other academic awards during her aca- demic career. Some called it the “No-Bell Prize,” because of the omission 
48 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

of Jocelyn Bell (her maiden name). One prominent astrophysicist told her in public, “Miss Bell, you have made the greatest astronomical dis- covery of the twentieth century.” Burnell was diplomatic about the matter, stating that Nobel Prizes should be awarded to research students only in exceptional cases and her pulsar work was not one of those cases. 
Burnell’s insight began when she noticed a coincidence, the unusual squiggles on the pen-and-ink recorder. She remembered seeing similar bursts of activity from the same location. Then she found another coin- cidence when she picked up the same type of signal in another part of the sky. Rather than dismissing these signals as “mere coincidence,” she homed in on them. 
Burnell’s example resembles Michael Gottlieb’s detection of unusual symptoms shown by a small set of patients. Nobody knew about AIDS at the time. Gottlieb couldn’t have had the insight that his patients had AIDS any more than Burnell could have known that she was looking at pulsars. Burnell and Gottlieb just felt that they might discover something useful by investigating the new coincidence they noticed. 
Spotting a coincidence is like a hunter picking up a trail. Coincidences guide the way people search for evidence. When Burnell got interested in those mysterious bursts, she rescheduled her life, interfering with her much desired sleep, to get to the observatory and slow down the paper speed at the times when she thought she might capture the bursts in more detail. Coincidences change our understanding, change what we notice, change what excites us, and set us on the path to making a discovery. 
Coincidences can also change our actions. One way they do this is by giving us an idea of what we need to alter to break a pattern we don’t like, as shown in the game plan the Denver Broncos football team devised to thwart LeRoy Butler in the Super Bowl. 
DEFENDING THE DEFENDER 
Super Bowl XXXII, played on January 25, 1998, pitted the Denver Bron- cos against the Green Bay Packers. During Denver’s preparations for the 
COINCIDENCES AND CURIOSITIES 49 

game, the team’s coaches reviewed films from Packers games earlier in the season. The coaches noticed again and again that one of the Green Bay defensive backs, LeRoy Butler, was getting in on the action even when he should have been elsewhere on the field. He was an unblocked phantom who would appear out of nowhere and ruin the plays of his ad- versaries. The Denver coaches never quite grasped how Butler was able to do this. But it happened too often to be ignored. 
Accordingly, the Denver coaches set a high priority to hit and deflect Butler. They created schemes so that different players would block him. Sometimes it would be a tackle, sometimes a fullback, sometimes a wide receiver. As a result, Terrell Davis, the Broncos’ running back, was able to gain 157 yards with three touchdowns, winning the most valuable player award. Butler still led Green Bay with nine tackles, but he rarely got into the backfield to disrupt Denver’s plays. The Denver coaches forged a winning game plan using the coincidence they detected: that LeRoy Butler usually seemed to be in the right place to disrupt a play. 
Coincidence insights are different from connection insights. In the case of connection insights, such as the Chalfie and Yamamoto and Gop- nik examples, the new pieces of information provided important details. The details count. If Chalfie had gone to a different lunch seminar, forget about the Nobel Prize. In contrast, what matters for coincidence insights is the repetition. If Gottlieb’s first patient had been a no-show, the second and third and fourth patients would have been enough to illustrate the pattern, the common symptoms of AIDS. The details of any one patient didn’t matter. 
Coincidences were a second insight strategy in my sample. They cropped up in only 12 of my cases, just a tenth of the sample, but they il- lustrated another way that insights can form. 
CURIOSITIES 
Late in my project a third insight strategy emerged: curiosities. Some in- sights were sparked by a single event or observation that provoked the 
50 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

reaction “What’s going on here?” These curiosity-driven investigations often led to impressive discoveries. One well-known example is the way Alexander Fleming stumbled upon the disease-fighting properties of peni- cillin. In 1928, Fleming noticed a halo of destruction affecting a bacterium, Staphylococcus. Fleming had been growing colonies of Staphylococcus in petri dishes, and he put them aside for the month of August while he took his family on vacation. When he returned, he found that one of the petri dishes had gotten contaminated with a mold. Oddly, all the Staphy- lococcus bacteria in the vicinity of the mold had gotten destroyed, whereas the pathogen colonies that weren’t in contact with the mold were growing normally. Fleming wasn’t expecting anything out of the ordinary, but when he spotted the unusual pattern in one of the petri dishes, he said, “That’s funny.” Fleming cultured the mold and found that it contained an infection-fighting substance—Fleming originally called it “mould juice”—that killed Staphylococcus and other bacteria. Further investiga- tion led to the discovery of penicillin, the world’s first antibiotic. 
Curiosities provoke people to investigate further, just as coincidences do. The initial “What’s going on here?” reaction doesn’t contain the in- sight, but it starts the person on the road to gaining the insight. Curiosities differ from coincidences in one way: They are sparked by a single event or observation rather than by the repetition of a pattern. 
Wilhelm Roentgen’s discovery of X-rays in 1885 came about through a curiosity. He was investigating cathode rays. He used a card- board covering to prevent any light from escaping his apparatus. Then he noticed that a barium platinocyanide screen across the room was glowing when his apparatus discharged cathode rays despite the card- board covering. That was odd. So he stopped his investigation to look more carefully at what this was all about. After several weeks Roentgen satisfied himself that the effect was not due to the cathode rays but to some new form of light. At the time, physicists appreciated a number of forms of radiation: visible, infrared, and ultraviolet. So X-rays could have been added to the list. But that didn’t happen. X-rays were greeted with disbelief. Lord Kelvin labeled them an elaborate hoax. One reason 
COINCIDENCES AND CURIOSITIES 51 

for the resistance was that a number of people used cathode ray equip- ment. If X-rays existed, surely others should have noticed them. (One researcher had noticed a glow but never accounted for it.) The skeptics eventually came around, and in 1901 Roentgen received the very first Nobel Prize in Physics. 
Transistors were also discovered through curiosity. In the early 1940s Russell Ohl, an engineer at Bell Labs, tried using silicon to get better radio reception. One day something strange happened when he inadver- tently used a piece of silicon that had a crack in it. When the silicon was exposed to light, the current flowing between the two sides of the crack jumped significantly. That aroused Ohl’s curiosity. He found that the crack was a dividing line between two impurities in the silicon. Ohl per- formed additional research showing that the impurities changed how much each section resisted electrical flow. Ohl’s discovery led to transistors and to all forms of diodes. He later built on his diode research to create the first silicon solar cells. 
My sample had only 9 cases of curiosities, fewer even than coinci- dences. Curiosities are unlikely to get us in trouble. If we examine a cu- riosity that doesn’t lead anywhere, we’ve just wasted some time. In contrast, coincidences can mislead us. 
THE DANGER OF COINCIDENCE 
We are all attuned to coincidences. We are sensitive to associations. Some- times we are too sensitive and see connections that aren’t real. That’s why we are skeptical about “mere coincidence.” Insight cannot depend on simply noticing coincidences. Burnell, Gottlieb, and the Denver Bron- cos coaches weren’t pursuing every association, every coincidence they noticed. Their success depended on their ability to identify coincidences that might have important implications even if they didn’t yet know what those implications might be. 
All the coincidence stories in this chapter show people with the back- ground and the expertise to judge that a coincidence might be important. 
52 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Their sense of what is typical enabled them to wonder about something atypical that might have meaningful consequences. 
We are association machines, forever noticing coincidences even when they are spurious. And many coincidences are spurious. This chapter has described cases in which coincidence paid off in insight. The chapter hasn’t presented cases in which the coincidence turned out to be a “mere coincidence” that didn’t pan out. 
Therefore, we are taught that we need to test coincidences before giving them credence. We need to collect evidence to make sure the co- incidence isn’t spurious. If the test fails, then we should cast the coin- cidence aside. 
This advice seems to make good sense, particularly if we’re afraid of making mistakes. Think back to the diagram with the up and down arrows. This advice to test coincidences is what we’d expect from someone with a down-arrow attitude, someone with little tolerance for mistakes. 
The advice to carefully test coincidences, however, puts too much faith in our ability to do the testing. Before we commit ourselves to reject any coincidences that don’t measure up, let’s examine a few cases that illustrate some limits of deliberate testing. We’re going to see that even in the face of contrary evidence, we’re sometimes justified in placing our faith in the coincidences we observe. The evidence can be wrong. 
GIVING YOURSELF AN ULCER 
Consider the strange journey of Barry Marshall, the Australian physician who, after discovering in 1982 that a chronic infection causes ulcers, was ostracized by the medical community for the next decade. Before Mar- shall’s findings, the medical community believed that ulcers were caused by stress. Not until 1994 did physicians accept Marshall’s claim that Helicobacter pylori causes ulcers and stomach cancer. As a result of Marshall’s research, physicians who used to treat ulcers by cutting out the lower third of the stomach now simply apply antibiotics to clear up the infection. In 2005 Marshall won a Nobel Prize for his findings. In his 
COINCIDENCES AND CURIOSITIES 53 

acceptance speech he quoted the historian Daniel Boorstin: “The greatest obstacle to knowledge is not ignorance; it is the illusion of knowledge.” When a hole forms in a peptic ulcer—an ulcer in the stomach—stomach acid from meals can get into the ulcer and create severe pain. Ulcers are not only painful; they’re also life-threatening. Severe cases lead to bleeding. If the ulcer penetrates the stomach wall, the contents of the stomach can leak into the peritoneal space and the patient can die from 
peritonitis. Before Marshall’s discovery was accepted, physicians typically had 
two ways to treat ulcers. One technique used surgery to cut off the lower third of the stomach and attach it to the small intestine. The surgery was extreme but effective. Because of the prevalence of ulcers, gastric surgery was a big business at the time. However, 10 percent of patients who had the surgery became gastric cripples who lacked appetite and never com- pletely recovered their health. The second strategy used antacids. The drug companies were making several billion dollars a year from Tagamet and Zantac. In the 1980s, about 3 percent of American adults carried Tagamet with them. 
In 1981, Barry Marshall was in the third year of specialized training to gain more experience in cardiology and open-heart surgery. To satisfy a research requirement, Marshall started working with Robin Warren, a pathologist who, two years earlier, had noticed that the gut could be overrun by a corkscrew-shaped bacterium that had to be hardy to survive in the acid-filled stomach environment. The infections coated the stom- ach. Warren had found them in twenty patients who’d been biopsied because their physicians thought they might have cancer. Warren didn’t find cancer, but he did find the bacteria. He wondered if this coincidence meant anything. 
For his research project, Barry Marshall agreed to probe this coinci- dence by investigating these twenty patients to see if they had anything wrong with them. As he looked over the names on the list, Marshall found one of his own former patients; she was a middle-aged woman who had complained to him of nausea and chronic stomach pain. Nothing 
54 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

had showed up from the usual tests, so she was sent to a psychiatrist, who put her on an antidepressant. And here she was on Robin Warren’s list, a coincidental link between chronic stomach pain and the corkscrew bacterium. 
Another patient on the list was an eighty-year-old man with severe stomach pain. He was diagnosed as having a narrowing in an artery in his gut. He was too old for surgery, so the physicians gave him an antibi- otic for the bacterial infection and sent him home. Two weeks later he came back in high spirits and claimed that his stomach pain was gone. Marshall was also struck by that coincidence. 
Marshall and Warren began to take these coincidences more seriously. They identified the bacteria as Helicobacter pylori. Marshall reviewed the medical archives and found several reports of a spiral gastric bacterium dating back to 1892. No one had yet commented on the coincidence of these reports. Marshall and Warren wondered if H. pylori caused some of the stomach problems patients complained about. They submitted their findings to the yearly conference of the Gastroenterological Society of Australia, but the reviewers turned their paper down, rating it in the bottom 10 percent of those they received in 1983. 
Marshall wasn’t easily discouraged. He prepared a proposal for a proper study, a clinical trial with one hundred patients with duodenal ul- cers, to inspect the lab cultures of their stomachs and count how many were also infected with H. pylori. If Marshall and Warren were right, many of these ulcer patients, perhaps most of them, possibly all of them, would show H. pylori in their stomachs. Such a result would demonstrate a link between the ulcers and the bacterium. The result would open the way for more research, possibly establishing that the bacterium, not stress, causes ulcers. 
Marshall and Warren got funding for a year to perform their study, starting in 1982. And it was a bust, at least at first. They didn’t find any H. pylori at all in the first thirty patients. 
So the evidence was clear. Patients with duodenal ulcers don’t have H. pylori. There should have been no need to waste time and energy com- pleting the study. The coincidence didn’t hold up. 
COINCIDENCES AND CURIOSITIES 55 

Still, they had gotten funding for the study, and Marshall continued. And then, by accident, he found something. One day the lab technicians called him with news that they had gotten a positive culture for H. pylori. 
Unknown to Marshall, the lab technicians had been throwing out the cultures after only two days. That was the technicians’ standard prac- tice in culturing for strep infections, the most common cultures they did. The reason for discarding the samples after two days was that strep cul- tures are gathered via a throat swab. With a strep infection, on the first day something might be seen but by the second day it would be contam- inated by other organisms present in the mouth and not worth saving. However, it turns out that H. pylori grows more slowly in a lab culture than strep infections. The cultures taken from the stomach are not con- taminated by other organisms, in contrast to the throat swabs. Therefore, the laboratory had been discarding Marshall’s samples too quickly. 
Fortunately for Marshall, and for ulcer sufferers worldwide, the hos- pital routine had gotten disrupted. Part of the way through the Marshall and Warren experiment, the hospital detected a superbug and started taking surveillance cultures on every staff member who had been near the infected ward. As a result, the microbiology lab didn’t have time to get to the latest culture of Marshall’s sample. The lab didn’t have time to test and then quickly discard the sample. That culture had been taken on a Thursday, and it sat around for five days, enough time for the H. py- lori to grow. That was when the lab technicians contacted Marshall with the good news. 
Marshall was elated but furious. Six months had been wasted. Marshall and Warren told the technicians to let the cultures grow longer. In the rest of the sample they identified thirteen patients with duodenal ulcers. Every one of them had H. pylori. 
With hindsight, we can see that the evidence from the first thirty pa- tients was flawed. Those cultures had been discarded too quickly, before they could test positive for H. pylori. Examples such as this illustrate why we shouldn’t put too much faith in the evidence. We don’t know all the conditions that can affect and contaminate evidence, even if the data sam- ples are carefully collected. 
56 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Marshall and Warren went on to link H. pylori to stomach cancer. Everyone who got stomach cancer also had gastritis. And no person without H. pylori had gastritis. That isn’t proof, but it’s a pretty powerful coincidence. 
Marshall and Warren inferred that H. pylori generated gastritis, which sometimes led to stomach cancer. They claimed that ulcers (and stomach cancer) are caused by Helicobacter pylori, not by stress. If they were right, ulcers should be treated by antibiotics to knock out the infection, rather than by surgery. But the medical community lampooned Marshall. Medical researchers were sure that stress caused ulcers. 
In desperation, Barry Marshall ran the ultimate study—on himself. He took some H. pylori from the gut of a patient with gastritis, stirred it into a broth, and gulped it down. Within a few days he developed gastritis, moving toward an ulcer. After five days he was waking up, running to the bathroom, and vomiting. After ten days he biopsied his own gut and cultured H. pylori. He had personally demonstrated that H. pylori causes ulcers. Marshall collected additional data, and by 1983 he had a conclusive case. Unfortunately, the medical community still rejected his papers and his evidence for another ten years. 
The tide turned when Marshall moved to the United States and had better access to publicity. His self-experiment was irresistible to magazines such as Reader’s Digest and the National Enquirer. The stories had titles like “Guinea-Pig Doctor Experiments on Self and Cures Ulcer.” He lost some scientific credibility but got his message out, and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and National Institutes of Health (NIH) took it from there. The popular culture still retains the idea that stress is what causes ulcers, but the medical community has finally stopped doing gastric surgery on ulcer patients. 
This case shows why the reasonable conclusion about gathering evi- dence may not be so reasonable after all. If this example seems like an anomaly, here is another one, a case in which the medical community al- most missed the cause of yellow fever because researchers trusted the data too much. 
COINCIDENCES AND CURIOSITIES 57 

MOSQUITOES 
When Walter Reed was sent to Cuba to determine what to do about yellow fever, he knew that the medical community was convinced that unsanitary conditions caused the disease, which spread either by direct contact or, more likely, through the air. Reed’s supervisor told him not to bother with the mosquito hypothesis because that had been disproven. 
A French-Scottish physician, Juan Carlos Finlay, who had worked in Cuba for decades, had formed the mosquito hypothesis based on a coinci- dence. Whenever there was a certain type of mosquito—the Culex (now called the Aedes), there was yellow fever. And the inverse was also true— no Culex mosquito, no yellow fever. When the temperature got too cold for the mosquito, yellow fever disappeared, only to reappear the next summer when the temperature rose and the mosquito returned. The Culex didn’t tol- erate higher elevations, and the people who lived at higher elevations escaped yellow fever. So in 1881, Finlay proposed that yellow fever was spread by mosquitoes rather than by unsanitary conditions or physical contact. 
Finlay’s mosquito hypothesis was widely ridiculed, just as Marshall’s H. pylori theory of ulcers would be one hundred years later. Finlay, dubbed the Mosquito Man, was called a crank and a crazy old man. Finlay per- sisted. He did studies letting mosquitoes bite people with yellow fever, then bite healthy volunteers. However, none of the healthy volunteers got sick. Therefore, the medical community, which had been skeptical of the mosquito hypothesis, concluded that the mosquito hypothesis was dis- proven. The evidence was clear. 
After the Spanish-American War ended, Walter Reed, a U.S. Army physician, went to Cuba in 1899 and 1900 to study yellow fever. While in Cuba, Reed heard about a strange case of a jail cell where all the pris- oners shared food, accommodations, and bedding, and one of them, only one, came down with yellow fever. Each prisoner contributed in his own way to the common smells; all of them breathed the same air, the same foul smells, yet none of the others got sick. The cell had a small window, and only something like a mosquito could get in. 
58 
SEEING WHAT OTHERS DON’T 

Also, there was a report from the southern United States about yellow fever outbreaks. A public health service physician in Mississippi, Henry Rose Carter, noted an incubation effect. If a ship with yellow fever victims landed, there might be some cases immediately, but then none occurred for another twelve days to three weeks. Carter wondered about a twelve- to twenty-one-day incubation period for new cases of yellow fever to de- velop. He speculated that those who were sick when the ship arrived in port were beginning to develop the disease. The others, who got yellow fever two weeks later, might have been bitten by mosquitoes that had first feasted on the initial ship victims and then had time for the disease to ma- ture inside them before they bit fresh victims. The two-week lull was the time it took the disease to develop inside the mosquitoes. 
Carter tested his ideas by surveying houses that had harbored a yel- low fever victim. After the victim came down with the disease, people who visited the house in the next two weeks remained healthy. Visitors who arrived later risked catching the disease, even if the patient was no longer there. Carter reasoned that if the mosquitoes needed a period of in- cubation before they became infectious, it would explain why Carlos Fin- lay’s efforts to use mosquitoes to spread yellow fever had ended in failure. 
By a fortunate coincidence, Carter was posted to Havana as the harbor quarantine officer. He had a chance to influence Walter Reed with his ideas about an incubation period. Despite the warning from his superior officer, Reed started wondering about Finlay’s mosquito hypothesis. 
While Walter Reed was on a trip back to the United States, two of his assistants, Jesse Lazear and James Carroll, with Reed’s permission, tried an experiment on themselves. They let a mosquito bite someone with yellow fever, waited twelve days, and then let the mosquito bite them. This was the experiment Finlay had tried except that they added an incubation period. 
Now the experiment worked. It worked too well. Both Lazear and Carroll came down with yellow fever. Lazear got it so severely he died. James Carroll was delirious (the nurses reported he was saying crazy things such as claiming that he got it from a mosquito) but recovered. 
COINCIDENCES AND CURIOSITIES 59 

Carroll told Walter Reed about the demonstration when Reed returned. They started more controlled experiments and demonstrated that Culex mosquitoes indeed transmitted yellow fever. 
To make the discovery, Reed’s research team had to recover from bad data (the study Finlay did) and from a wrong belief (that mosquitoes are not the culprit). The mosquito theory had to overcome its lack of plausibility; it seemed bizarre that a tiny mosquito could kill a full-grown man. It had to overcome a rival theory: miasma theory asserted that dis- eases such as yellow fever were caused by unsanitary conditions and un- healthy air. Miasma theory was much more plausible than the mosquito theory. You could smell the stench of a dirty area and imagine that it was unhealthy. 
The ulcer example and the yellow fever example show how flawed data can appear to “disprove” an accurate insight. We shouldn’t take the ridiculous position of believing in coincidences regardless of the evidence, but we shouldn’t automatically believe the evidence either. Evidence can be tainted by variables that we are not aware of. 
The ulcer and the yellow fever examples also illustrate the topic of contradictions. Both Barry Marshall and Walter Reed’s research team had to cope with contradictions between beliefs and evidence. They had to reject the prevailing wisdom of their time. Of the 12 cases we coded for coincidence, 8 of them also coded for contradictions. That leads to the fourth suspect. Can contradictions lead to insights? 
